Several hours after creating a secret software experiment, a suspended computer science student recalled today, he returned to his terminal at Cornell University, to discover that his program had gone awry and was jamming a nationwide network of computers.
Several hours after creating a secret software experiment, a suspended computer science student recalled today, he returned to his terminal at Cornell University, to discover that his program had gone awry and was jamming a nationwide network of computers.
''I was scared; it seemed like the worm was going out of control,'' Robert Tappan Morris told a Federal jury here in his first public explanation of the program that gained nationwide attention after it stalled a network of academic, corporate and military computers in November 1988.
After trying to warn computer managers of the danger, Mr. Morris said he went to sleep and the next day ''screwed up his courage.'' He called his father, a National Security Agency computer expert, to tell him what he had done.
Mr. Morris, a 24-year-old resident of Cambridge, Mass., said he intended his program to make one copy of itself in each computer in Internet, a collection of computer networks. But, he said, his academic experiment turned out to be a ''dismal failure.''
He said a fundamental design error in the program caused it to copy itself hundreds of times onto individual computers, thus slowing or stopping them.
Mr. Morris, viewed by some as a dedicated computer researcher, by others as a reckless hacker, testified that it was never his intention to slow down computers or damage Internet data. ''It was a mistake, and I'm sorry,'' he said.
Mr. Morris was suspended from Cornell last year after a university board of inquiry found that he had acted irresponsibly. But the board said he could reapply for re-admission this fall.
Issue of Intentions 
What Mr. Morris's intentions were in writing the program may prove to be a crucial issue in the trial in Federal District Court here. Federal prosecutors and defense lawyers disagree about whether the Government needs to prove that Mr. Morris intended to damage the computer network if he is to be proven guilty of violating the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986.
Mr. Morris is being tried under a section of the law that requires the Government to prove that he intentionally used computers without authorization and altered, damaged or destroyed data in those computers, causing more than $1,000 in damage.
Today was the final day of testimony in the trial. Prosecution and defense lawyers are scheduled to present final arguments to the jury on Monday, and the case could go to the jury that day.
A number of major issues have been raised in the trial about the nation's computer laws and the security of its computer networks. Computer scientists have pointed out that the program inadvertently served as an example of how vulnerable the complex networks that tie together university, corporate and military computers are.
The Justice Department views the case as a test of existing computer laws, and department officials have said they may go to Congress and ask that new laws be written if Mr. Morris is not convicted.
If convicted Mr. Morris could serve up to five years in jail and be fined up to $250,000. Federal sentencing guidelines require that he spend at least six months in jail if he is found guilty.
Spent Little Time on Program 
Mr. Morris testified today that he had no intention to harm the network. But he acknowledged that he had written his program in such a way as to make it difficult to locate and erdicate it from computer networks.
''My purpose was to write a program that would spread as widely as possible in the Internet,'' he said.
He testified that he began writing the program shortly after starting his graduate studies at Cornell in October 1988. He said he had not spent a great deal of time perfecting the program, perhaps only four or five days.
After he realized on the night of Nov. 2 that the program was stalling thousands of computers, he said he was frightened and called a friend, Andrew Sudduth, then a computer manager at Harvard University. Mr. Morris said he asked Mr. Sudduth to distribute instructions to computer managers around the country on how to kill the program.
Mr. Sudduth testified Wednesday that he had anonymously sent the message out electronically, but that it had not been widely read because the computer networks were already clogged by Mr. Morris's program.
'Messed Up With the First One' 
Mr. Morris said that later on Nov. 2 he also spoke by telephone with another friend, Paul Graham, a computer science graduate student at Harvard. Mr. Graham suggested that he write a second program that would kill the first program. But Mr. Morris said he rejected that idea.
''I didn't do that because I had messed up with the first one and it didn't appear that I would be able to do any better the second time,'' he said.
In testimony on Wednesday as a prosecution witness. Mr. Graham defended Mr. Morris's actions, but faulted him for carelessness. ''I said, 'You idiot.' It was such a good idea and he just blew it, I was so mad.''
In his cross-examination of Mr. Morris, Mark D. Rasch, a Justice Department lawyer, attempted to establish that Mr. Morris had written a program intended to break into as many computers on the network as possible without authorization. Mr. Morris did not dispute that allegation.
On Wednesday a prosecution witness who works as a computer researcher at the Army Ballistics Research Laboratory in Aberdeen, Md., said the installation shut down its laboratories for six days after the program attacked its computers.

