Crackdown on Legion of Doom: Hackers linked to Internet break-ins: [3* Edition]
Dolinar, Lou. The Vancouver Sun; Vancouver, B.C. [Vancouver, B.C]04 Apr 1990: D2.
Abstract
The original Legion of Doom, named for the comic book villains who battled Superman, organized on an electronic bulletin board on Long Island in the mid-1980s. While few of the original members remain active in hacking, in many cases they trained current members. Computer bulletin boards throughout the United States contain hundreds of pages of Legion of Doom "how to" files for committing various forms of computer break-ins and fraud.
She said that her office has seized Legion of Doom members' materials that include programs that use so-called dictionary attacks to decrypt passwords, a method used successfully in many of the Internet attacks. [Gail Thackeray] said that Internet hacking was a relatively minor part of her own case, which involves break-ins into a hospital computer system in Arizona.
In Austin, Texas, Secret Service agents recently seized three computers, one belonging to a games-design corporation, the other two to alleged Legion of Doom members. A source said the Secret Service was looking for evidence that a gang member had been using University of Texas computers to attack a machine operated by security expert Gene Spafford of Purdue. 
Full Text
THE UNITED States' oldest known hacker gang, under investigation for a wide range of illegal activities, has been linked to some of the recent break-ins of computers on the nationwide Internet network, according to an Arizona prosecutor and other law-enforcement sources.
Gail Thackeray, an Arizona assistant attorney general for organized crime and racketeering, said that she has been working with federal prosecutors on several cases that show that members of the so-called Legion of Doom in recent months have invaded and attacked systems on Internet. Internet is a network that links thousands of academic, research and military computers used for non-classified work.
"They're one of several groups involved," she said.
In a crackdown apparently unrelated to those break-ins, federal prosecutors for the past six months have been focusing on the group, which they describe in court papers as a loosely knit organization of about 15 older hackers in New York, Georgia, Texas, Michigan, Florida and other states. One federal law-enforcement source said that the current effort was one of the biggest ever coordinated probes of hackers.
In recent weeks, four alleged members of the group have been indicted in Atlanta and Chicago on fraud charges unrelated to the Internet incidents. The indictments said that the group was capable of disrupting police and ambulance emergency 911 lines in a half a dozen Southern states. Supporting court papers describe elaborate schemes that involved stealing credit histories and rerouting phone lines to steal money and merchandise.
In addition, a government affidavit alleged that last June hackers believed to be Legion of Doom members planted software "time bombs" in American Telephone & Telegraph's 5ESS switching computers in Denver, Atlanta and New Jersey. The programs, the affidavit said, were detected and defused by AT&T security personnel before they could disrupt phone service.
Besides the four indictments, sources said that Secret Service agents and some local law-enforcement agencies have executed more than a dozen sealed search warrants against alleged members of the gang in various states, seizing computers, disks and printouts.
None of the four defendants could be reached for comment. Jack Martin, the Atlanta attorney representing one of them, said, "They had the potential to do a lot of things but they never did anything. It's not the crime of the century, it's just childish pranks. But if everybody starts writing about it, it'll seem like the crime of the century."
The original Legion of Doom, named for the comic book villains who battled Superman, organized on an electronic bulletin board on Long Island in the mid-1980s. While few of the original members remain active in hacking, in many cases they trained current members. Computer bulletin boards throughout the United States contain hundreds of pages of Legion of Doom "how to" files for committing various forms of computer break-ins and fraud.
The probe of the Legion and the Internet investigation are being run out of the U.S. Attorney's office in Chicago, in coordination with the Secret Service, which has jurisdiction over computer crime, and the FBI. Bill Cook, assistant U.S. Attorney in Chicago who is coordinating both cases, could not be reached for comment.
According to Thackeray, Legion of Doom hackers have obtained "superuser" status - or full access - on many Internet computers, and have set up surreptitious messaging systems, known as bulletin boards, on a number of university computer systems.
She said that her office has seized Legion of Doom members' materials that include programs that use so-called dictionary attacks to decrypt passwords, a method used successfully in many of the Internet attacks. Thackeray said that Internet hacking was a relatively minor part of her own case, which involves break-ins into a hospital computer system in Arizona.
Break-ins appear to be more widespread than originally reported. Besides the sites originally reported hit - Purdue, Harvard and Boston universities, Digital Equipment Corp., Los Alamos National Laboratories, and the University of Texas - officials at three other sites confirmed they had hacker problems: Picatinny Arsenel, Dover, N.J.; Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, Calif.; and NASA Ames Research Center, Mountain View, Calif. Spokesmen for those sites said no classified information had been compromised.
In Austin, Texas, Secret Service agents recently seized three computers, one belonging to a games-design corporation, the other two to alleged Legion of Doom members. A source said the Secret Service was looking for evidence that a gang member had been using University of Texas computers to attack a machine operated by security expert Gene Spafford of Purdue.
Investigators said that financial gain figured large in the activities of the group. Details in the indictments were slim, but other court papers and a source familiar with the group's activities fleshed out one of the schemes, in which one hacker used stolen credit card numbers to wire cash, via Western Union, to an accomplice in another city.
Credit: NEWSDAY
Word count: 814
(Copyright The Vancouver Sun)
