More-Daring Web Mergers May Develop
Could Yahoo! merge with CBS? How about America Online and Walt Disney?
The recent wave of cyberstock marriages has largely involved Internet companies buying other Internet companies. But their mushrooming market valuations have some on Wall Street dreaming of more adventuresome couplings for these newly minted Internet blue chips: snapping up more traditional businesses outside their home turf.
It's all speculation at this point. And such crossboundary hookups could be nettlesome, to say the least. But they could become a reality, and the prospects have Wall Street's merger bankers buzzing.
"As the Internet companies continue to mature, and as they continually seek content, they will ultimately butt heads with some of the traditional media companies," says Louis G. Zachary Jr., a managing director at Credit Suisse First Boston. "In the end, all of these guys need something to get you to sign on to their Web site."
That means more deals -- alliances, licensing, or outright acquisitions -- giving Internet firms access to "content" such as financial data, business-to-business information, entertainment and local listings. More ominous for Internet investors: Any takeover by an Internet company of a traditional media concern could also mean the end of its lofty Internet premium.
Consider the currency wielded by these Internet companies. AOL's $80 billion market capitalization dwarfs 469 of the companies in the S&P 500. And its price-to-earnings ratio of 350 exceeds that of many well-established media giants, including Disney, CBS, News Corp. and Viacom.
Even if AOL weren't bigger, a smaller company can often acquire a larger company if the acquirer has a larger P/E ratio. That's because the acquisition will add to its earnings per share. And of course, investors know that just because few thought a deal was possible doesn't mean it can't happen.
But that currency won't mean much if some key barriers -- culture and valuation models, to name two -- aren't straddled. Besides, says a senior media executive, it's a lot easier if one Internet company with high-priced stock is using the shares to buy a just-as-rich Internet stock.
For Internet companies, the risk is that buying a business valued by such mastodon measures as profitability and cash flow could hurt their lofty share prices, now driven mainly by hope. And old-line companies, intrigued as they may be in the Internet, may not want to trade their venerable shares for a punt into the littletested world of Internet valuations.
So where could the world of cyberspace meet the earthbound? Start with one key area of overlap: the large Internet portal sites such as AOL, Yahoo and Lycos, which have moved closer to the model used by media companies, gathering and packaging audiences and matching them with advertisers.
There already have been discussionsbetween AOL and Disney, Yahoo and Disney, Excite and Time Warner, Lycos and many parties -- but that chatter hasn't yielded much. The reasons include steep Internet valuations, slower growth in media companies, and the cultural gap between these types of companies.
AOL and Yahoo executives have said they have talked to Disney. An Excite executive has said the firm has talked with Time Warner. Both AOL and Yahoo declined to talk about the current spate of speculation about what their next target may be.
It's one thing for GeoCities shareholders to take $3.9 billion in Yahoo stock in exchange for GeoCities shares, as they did last week -- the astronomical P/E ratios of both stocks make them funny money from a traditional viewpoint. But would CBS shareholders be as willing to hand over their programming for the measly profits but massive potential of Yahoo?
"I don't think many media companies are accepting their valuations," a senior executive of a large media company says. "I think we'd probably be more interested in buying those companies if their market values were much more realistic.
Of course, he notes, the legal responsibilities of directors would make it difficult to dismiss an offer without seriously considering it first.
The difference in viewpoint can make media and Internet firms seem like people looking through opposite ends of a telescope. "When they complain about the high stock prices and don't want to pay for them, it sounds a bit like the days when companies thought cellular companies were too expensive," says Joe Kraus, co-founder of Excite, which is being acquired by At Home in a deal currently valued at $5.9 billion. "Now they have had to pay enormous sums to get in the business."
From the Internet companies' point of view, in the bizarre economic world they inhabit, revenues and profits can be undesirable. "You put a boat anchor around your neck by bringing revenue, profitability and a well-understood business model into the system," says Chuck Cory, head of technology mergers at Morgan Stanley Dean Witter. A takeover of a traditional media company by a big Internetfirm, Mr. Cory says, "could completely crack the Internet valuation they have."
Yet all Internet currency isn't created equal. Yahoo and particularly AOL are considered "blue-chip" Internet companies. "The currency I feel most comfortable with would be AOL, because I think they have a real relationship with consumers across many lines," says the senior media executive. AOL is "a company that I think could grow to justify its market cap, from a traditional valuation metric."
For a peek into how a crossboundary deal could work, look at AOL's announcement Monday that it would acquire ticket seller MovieFone for $388 million in stock, says John Forlines, a managing director at J.P. Morgan. Though most of MovieFone's business comes through telephones rather than its Internet site, Mr. Forlines expects many MovieFone customers to switch to buying the tickets through the AOL site.
There already have been smaller deals and partnerships involving Internet and media companies; these mostly involve media companies buying into Internet firms. Among them is Walt Disney's 43% investment in Infoseek and General Electric's 4.99% stake in CNET and 19% stake in CNET's Snap site.
As always, there are relentless rumors of larger Internet-arena mergers. Key companies to watch include Lycos, Microsoft -- though large purchases could be vexsome because of Justice Department scrutiny -- and AOL, which people close to the firm say may be looking at financially oriented sites and those that add value to their local offerings.
Lycos has confirmed holding discussions with numerous parties, but has said it isn't for sale. A Disney spokesman couldn't be reached to comment. Microsoft declined to comment.
Two media companies this week indicated one way they might bridge the valuation gap. Time Warner on Wednesday said it was in talks with Internet companies about some sort of joint venture. Time Warner said it didn't plan to make acquisitions that would require a significant outlay of cash or equity, but would instead use assets such as its CNN Web site as currency in an Internet deal. CBS yesterday said it was considering a plan to turn its Internet assets into a new public company, which could be used as a currency for CBS to use in investing in other Internet companies.
Meanwhile, rich stock translates into cash. Several large Internet companies have raised sizable cash hoards that they could use to fund acquisitions. Amazon.com last week raised $1.25 billion in the largest U.S. convertible-bond offering ever; the company declines to say how it plans to use the proceeds. Yahoo has $500 million in cash, while AOL is sitting on $2 billion.

https://search-proquest-com.libproxy2.usc.edu/docview/398713804/fulltext/2AEF4DCD3B134EDEPQ/1?accountid=14749
