In more than 30 developing countries, doctors and other health care workers rely on HealthNet to save lives.
Launched in 1989, HealthNet (www.healthnet.org/hnet/hnet.html) provides thousands of medical workers in the developing world with e- mail accounts, access to the latest medical research and a way to communicate with colleagues working in isolated areas. Its moderated, free e-mail list has more than 11,000 subscribers in more than 135 countries who report, discuss and request assistance for outbreaks of infectious diseases, such as dengue fever in Malaysia or the Ebola virus in Gabon.
Ten years ago, stories like this persuaded international organizations that the Internet presented a new way to help the developing world catch up, leading to investments in more than 100 technology initiatives in Africa alone. But at the dawn of the 21st century, successes like HealthNet are few and far between.
In the developing world, the Internet has not delivered on its early promise. Old hardware, a weak telecommunications infrastructure and, in some cases, local political opposition have rendered the promised benefits of technology elusive. Such poor results have forced policy makers to question what the Internet can bring to places that lack essentials such as safe water supplies.
"We are still searching for some good reasons to pack computers into the bush," Vern Weitzel, a United Nations Development Organization worker in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, said in an e-mail interview.
"We know it's a good idea but if it is driven by tech-os, it tends to get unstuck in the provinces where the phone lines are a couple of wires held up by a twig and there is nobody in a day's drive who has ever seen the guts of a computer, much less ever fixed one."
The evidence is not just anecdotal. According to the United Nations Commission on Science and Technology for Development, which spent three years investigating the benefits and risks of information and communication technologies (ICTs), "There are many instances where the use of ICTs is bringing widespread social and economic benefits. However, there are as many instances where ICTs are making no difference to the lives of developing people."
It is no wonder that the development community succumbed to high- tech hype. In the developed world, the Internet has ushered in the greatest period of wealth creation in history. It has undermined traditional power structures and rocked the way most industries conduct business. For many in development agencies, there was no reason to think technology could not have similarly dramatic effects in the Third World.
But reality has not lived up to expectations. Take Africa, the world's least developed continent and the focus of numerous Internet development programs sponsored by international agencies such as the United Nations, the United States Agency for International Development and the Canada-based International Development Research Center.
While the number of computers connected to the Internet in Africa jumped 36% from July 1998 to January 1999, it is predominantly urban elite Africans who are online. Meanwhile, more than 70% of Africa's population is rural and access to telephones remains scarce. Only about 14 million lines are installed in the entire continent -- fewer than the number of phone lines in Manhattan -- and almost all are in urban areas.
Moreover, most Internet growth occurred in just one country, South Africa. South Africa accounted for more than 48,000 of 50,000 computers connected to the Internet on the continent in 1994 and ranks 16th in the world in terms of its number of Internet connections. Excluding South Africa, fewer than 100,000 dial-up Internet accounts are available for more than 700 million people. Since most Internet service providers are concentrated in the capital cities, accessing the Internet requires a long-distance call for the mostly rural public.
The African Development Forum, a United Nations body whose aim is to establish an African-driven development agenda, calculates that it costs roughly $10.50 per hour to use the Internet in Chad, where the average Gross Domestic Product per person is just $187. That compares with $8.40 per hour for Internet access in Uganda and $6 per hour in Angola.
Weak infrastructure is not the only obstacle to implementing technology initiatives. Political opposition also has thwarted some rural development projects.
In Mexico, for example, a pilot program launched in 1997 to build community centers with access to phones, fax machines and the Internet outside Mexico City and in the Michoacan state failed dismally. Only five of the original 23 so-called telecenters are functioning today.
The reasons were more political and cultural than technical. The launch of the telecenters outside Mexico City coincided with a hotly contested election. According to the project's director, Scott Robinson, incumbent officials dragged their feet on the project because they did not want the Internet to provide easy access to information about the opposition. After the election, the new government never authorized a budget to expand the pilot system.
In the Michoacan state, a government official involved in the pilot was transferred just as the project was getting under way. The result: the promised telephone lines for dial-up access never materialized, and only the three telecenters in or near small cities with access to local ISPs began to operate. Three federal budget cuts in 1998 also hampered the program's original plans to provide training and support for the fledgling telecenters' users.
"Our team was a bit naive. We were overly enthusiastic that we could fulfill project objectives without sufficient guarantees of project continuity," Robinson said.
It has been a rude awakening for the techno-optimists. Faced with the reality of life in the Third World, many in the development community have had to revise their expectations that the Internet would provide a quick fix for the vacuum of medical and educational information in rural areas and help backward regions join the global economy. The shock of this reversal has polarized the debate between those who now dismiss the technology as an impossibly expensive luxury and the zealots who insist that, despite its current limitations, the Internet will ultimately prove the developing countries' salvation.
Gabriel Accascina, the regional coordinator for the UN's Asia Pacific Development Information Program in Malaysia is one of the optimists.
Accascina and his team have launched a string of successful, targeted technology initiatives in the Asia Pacific region. One project created a computer network for a group of female farmers in India that enables them to obtain current market prices for their crops as well as negotiate purchases and sales. In Fiji, the Internet has allowed islanders to process tickets for Cathay Pacific Airlines.
"I work putting the Net to practical uses for practical people," Accascina said. "By giving people access to key information, the Internet is changing their lives. There is no doubt that this is the way this world is going."
Perhaps, but for many in the developing world, dreams of a wired global democracy have withered and the electronic messiah has been demoted to a mere prophet.
"The Internet is nothing more than one more tool which can probably help to improve the situation of developing nations in some limited sectors," said Uwe Afemann, a professor at the University of Osnabrck, Germany, who has written dozens of reports on the impact of the Internet in the developing world. "In no case is it able to leapfrog some stages of development."
The debate is bound to continue. And that is exactly what infuriates some on the ground. The Internet may have long-term benefits but, in the meantime, the much-touted global network is not paying for aspirin or syringes.
"Our priorities are hygiene, sanitation, safe drinking water," said Supatra Koirala, who works at a private nursing home in Katmandu. "How is having access to the Internet going to change that?"
Credit: New York Times
Word count: 1294
Copyright Journal/Sentinel, Inc. Oct 3, 1999
Black, J. (1999, Oct 03). Net isn't wired for wealth in developing nations. Milwaukee Journal Sentinel Retrieved from http://libproxy.usc.edu/login?url=https://search-proquest-com.libproxy1.usc.edu/docview/261025247?accountid=14749
