Speaking to a group of Iowa farmers last month, former New Jersey Sen. Bill Bradley drew a round of chuckles over a seemingly offhand remark about the Internet.
Technology was moving so quickly, Bradley said, that no self- respecting politician could run for president today without an Internet site. "By the way," he added, "mine is www.billbradley.com."
The aside was anything but casual. Since he launched his uphill battle for the Democratic nomination last December, Bradley has followed a deliberate strategy of linking his Web site to his presidential campaign.
The strategy is paying off. Last week, Bradley reported that he raised $650,000 from his Web site through Sept. 30. Although that is only a fraction of the $18.4 million Bradley has taken in, it far surpasses anything raised online by other presidential contenders, including Vice President Gore, who has fashioned himself as the technology candidate.
"It's a very dramatic breakthrough," said Don Goff, professor of information and telecommunications studies at the University of Maryland. "Bradley has definitely been very aggressive."
While online fund-raising won't replace the $1,000-per-person dinners that have become the lifeblood of federal and state elections today, Bradley's success is the latest indication of how the Internet is broadening the reach of political campaigns.
Nearly two-thirds of the $650,000 Bradley has raised came from donors who billed their credit cards online, just as if they were ordering merchandise from an online store. The others downloaded a form and mailed in a check.
Lynn Reed, Bradley's Internet consultant, said the campaign hasn't analyzed what sort of people are giving. But Reed said she believes the donors follow the demographics of the Internet, meaning younger, technology-savvy users who are comfortable supplying personal and financial information over the Internet.
"I suspect that our donors are by and large not traditional Democratic donors," said Reed, who developed the 1996 Clinton-Gore campaign Web site. "These are not the usual suspects that get invited to Democratic fund-raisers at $1,000 a pop."
About 1 percent of those visiting Bradley's Web site wind up making a contribution, and about 12 percent fill out some type of personal information that the campaign uses to build a nationwide volunteer base.
As Bradley's visibility increases, so do the donations. Bradley's online contributions for the month of September, for example, almost exceeded what he raised in the preceding five months.
September marked the beginning of a high-profile media blitz for the candidate, who returned to his native Crystal City, Mo., for a fall kickoff speech.
Nearly 1,600 people logged on to Bradley's site in September, making contributions of $203,232, for an average donation of about $129, according to the campaign.
From the beginning, Bradley has sought to publicize his Web site every chance he gets. The site address appears on all the podiums that he speaks from, and no audience is too big or too small for Bradley to let slip a mention of it, as he did with farmers in Ottumwa, Iowa, last month.
"Every time he's on national television and can manage to work it in on television in an unobtrusive way, he does," said Reed. The site costs about $18,000 a month to maintain.
Bradley was also the first presidential candidate to petition the Federal Election Commission to receive federal matching contributions from credit card payments, which the FEC had banned. The FEC approved the request this summer.
"What we have done well is integrate the Web site and the Internet strategy into the strategy of the campaign, which has the effect of increasing traffic, which has the effect of bringing in money," Reed said.
Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the top fund-raiser of the 2000 campaign with more than $56 million, has raised only about $100,000 from his Web site, www.georgewbush.com, since he launched his presidential bid in March, according to spokeswoman Mindy Tucker.
Gore, who has delivered several major speeches on the Internet, has also invested heavily in his Web site, www.algore2000.com. But so far, Gore has raised about $115,000 from online contributions, according to campaign spokeswoman Kiki Moore.
"Our focus around the Web has been far more organizational," said Moore, noting that Gore has raised more money from small donors than Bradley. "We have not relied on the Web to get our lower dollar contributors."
Credit: COX WASHINGTON BUREAU
Word count: 728
(Copyright, The Atlanta Journal and Constitution - 1999)

