Headnote
Many libraries now provide Internet access for their patrons and staff or are planning to do so. The push toward Internet access in libraries is proceeding despite the fact that establishing and supporting access is time-consuming, expensive, and fraught with political and policy implications. How useful is the Internet in carrying out the mission of contemporary libraries? Given that library budgets are finite with extreme demands for diversified collections and services, what gains, if any, should library professionals expect from the investment in network connectivity? This study seeks to test the Internet's effectiveness at an important facet of library practice-answering reference questions. Researchers conducted a three-fold test of Internet effectiveness: depth, accuracy, and durability. Using a variety of search tools, they found that the Internet could provide answers to a significant percentage of actual reference questions. There was little significant difference between the accuracy of information obtained through Internet sources and traditional reference sources. The Internet sites showed surprising durability throughout the project.
What was prediction is reality. There is now widespread access to network information. The volume of information being produced and stored on computer networks is massive and increasing. Current choices include multiple formats: complex data sets, high resolution graphics, sounds, video, and animation are available in addition to plentiful text databases and documents. The current availability of billions of records in proprietary databases and public-domain networks is only the beginning.
The Significance of the Study
The watchword for today's Internet is variety. The Internet is a hodgepodge, with constantly changing tools, protocols, standards, and quasi-standards: e-mail, the World Wide Web, Telnet hosts, FTP archives, discussion groups, and gopher sites. Together these tools form the latest attempt at fulfilling a dream, over a half-century old, of being able to obtain information regardless of time, space, or format.1 While the Internet's intellectual lineage spans the greater part of this century and its technological roots are decades old, library interest in and use of the Internet began only about ten years ago.2 Scanning library trade, research, and professional journals reveals the first mention of the Internet in 1988.3 Since then, the Internet, not to mention other network tools, facets, and issues, has accounted for thousands of articles.
Conferences and workshops sponsored by professional associations, regional library cooperatives, graduate programs, and private trainers all seek to give library workers the skills, knowledge, and experience to cope with the Internet. There are a few large projects seeking to build virtual collections accessible on public networks.4 Some libraries are building community information networks where clients can find a wealth of local information, ranging from community events to social services. In addition to adding content to the Internet, a number of cataloging projects sponsored by libraries and library utilities are seeking to impose order on a disorderly Internet.5
A recent American Library Association survey noted that 25 percent of public libraries provide some kind of Internet access to patrons.6 The 1996 National Survey of Public Libraries and the Internet documented a 113-percent increase in Internet connectivity in public libraries since 1994.7 The Barron list, which contains instructions for connecting to library catalogs on the Internet, shows more than four hundred library-sponsored Internet sites in North America alone.8
Though libraries are instituting Internet access in increasing numbers, there is still a wide disparity in access. While 96 percent of public libraries serving populations of 250,000 to 499,999 and 82 percent serving a population of 1,000,000 or more provide Internet access, only 31.3 percent of libraries serving communities with less than 5,000 have access.9 And that access varies considerably, ranging from simple e-mail for staff to high-speed, multimedia access over dedicated networks for staff and patrons. Political promises as well as current national policy seek to make Internet access available to all, not only for the better-funded libraries and schools.10
Predictions of widespread Internet access aside, the current march toward making the Internet available in libraries does not come without a price. There are several methods or network configurations to choose from to gain access to Internet services, ranging from a simple modem connection via an Internet service provider to direct connections on rapid networks covering entire organizations.ll The hardware, software, and services required to connect an entire organization to the Internet usually represent substantial budget outlays.12 Even if lower-cost alternatives become available for network access, there is the greater and ongoing expense of maintaining local networks tied to the greater network. A cost analysis for Internet use has to account for the ongoing support, upgrades, and replacement of desktop computers. Beyond access, staff expertise has to be developed or purchased if a library plans to create its own Web site. Patron training and the time it takes to deal with the policy and political issues caused by Internet access also have to be added to the costs that make up the actual price tag of this new technology.
All the ingredients that make large-scale networking happen represent significant expenditures to libraries already facing alarming serial cancellations and budget cuts that impact existing print and electronic collections, staff, and services. Even in growing and prosperous communities, network access has to compete with the needs for expanding locations, collections, and services. In order to justify the demand of network technologies on finite budgets, libraries must show that internetworking is more than fad, image, hype, or even the harbinger of future libraries. The Internet has to offer something greater than Web surfing. By themselves, anecdotes describing someone using the Internet to solve an isolated problem or answer an esoteric question will not justify Internetaccess in libraries. Large-scale networking has to demonstrate significant utility to the organization- real services and value that library patrons and personnel can use now. The Internet must buttress or advance at least part of the library's mission-providing dependable and accurate information to meet a variety of needs. Our project seeks to determine the Internet's usefulness at a common and practical task central to libraries: answering the kinds of questions that our clients ask. Is the Internet really a valuable resource at finding the information that patrons require?
Review of the Literature
Publication and work toward using networks and Internet technology to advance the mission of libraries is not new. There are a variety of articles that suggest Internet sources useful for reference work or that provide bibliographies of sites appropriate to given subject areas.l3 A long-standing example is College and Research Libraries News' "Internet Resources" articles. An updated and expanded collection of the pieces is also available as a separate publication.14
Little research is available that explores how the Internet and network technology has impacted the library's workflow or services. Basu surveyed an extremely limited number of librarians to determine their use of the Internet.15 Mellendorf suggested a number of traditional library tasks (ready reference, database searching, collection development, item location, and library instruction) that can be advanced through Internet technologies.l6 Through both their Web site and an ALA poster session, Alexander and Tate, reference librarians at Widener University, offered an example of how to use quality filters or collection criteria in evaluating Internet-based reference tools.17 Chuck Koutnik selected a sample of 104 questions from Thomas Slaven's Reference Interviews, Questions, and Materials and found answers for 32 percent using the World Wide Web alone.l8
The Goal of the Study
The goal of this study is to test the Internet's potential to enhance reference service in libraries. What percentage of reference questions can be solved using the Internet and its sites and sources? How capable is the Internet as a reference tool? Can the Internet provide answers to the kinds of typical reference queries encountered in everyday practice? Should reference professionals use the Internet as the tool of last resort or should its usefulness move the Internet to a more prominent place in the reference professional's hierarchy of tools?
In this study, we seek to adjust practitioners' expectations to reality concerning the efficacy of the Internet as a reference tool. This study also can function as a benchmark concerning the maturity of the Internet. Future replication of the study will gauge whether or not networks are becoming better or worse at satisfying a wide range of information needs. From a library perspective, future scenarios of the Internet or its successor might resemble one or more of the following (with varying implications to practice):
* An environment for technology hobbyists not fit for general consumption.
* An entertainment extravaganza with little to satisfy research needs.
* A mass of information with no mechanism to reasonably find information.
* The domain of commercial interests with information for those with means.
* Full of content making it an ideal reference source for a number of questions.
Finding the Internet an able reference tool would suggest much about how it should be used in libraries. Should Internet stations be viewed as a novelty and cordoned off to a specific virtual library area?19 If, through our study and others with the same aim, the Internet is found wanting or useless as a reference tool, those libraries pursuing network technologies would be doing so for, at best, some future Internet potential. If the Internet offers little to meet tangible library goals, libraries are, at worst, succumbing to the general glitz of technology and chrome.20 The most straightforward goal of our research project is a measure of what kind of practical reference bang a library gets from its Internet buck.
Study Methodology
The library professional literature has long suggested a three-fold test of reference tools and sources:
* Depth: The tool must provide answers to a variety of questions.
* Veracity: The tool must provide correct, current, and trustworthy information.
* Durability: The tool should be dependable providing information over time.
Depth and the Internet
In order to determine how the Internet fares in terms of depth, we sought to discover what percentage of actual, patron-generated questions could be answered using the Internet alone. Past information retrieval experiments have identified a key ingredient for success and validity in this kind of evaluation or measure-a large cache of actual, heterogeneous reference questions.21 Testing the Internet's performance as a reference tool on a set of contrived or atypical questions would yield little of value about everyday practice.22 Our goal was to gather a question population that would be sufficiently diverse to mimic the kinds of queries library professionals encounter. By adding randomizing strategies in collecting these questions, we sought to avoid queries applicable to only a specialized clientele, some contrived difficulty level, or our own interests.
We gathered questions by shadowing reference professionals at the Pikes Peak Library District, a medium-sized public library system serving a population of 450,000 in Colorado Springs, Colorado. The Pikes Peak Library District was our project site of choice for four reasons:
1. it has a high reference volume making question gathering practical;
2. it serves a diverse population resulting in a varied question base;
3. public libraries face the greatest challenge in justifying network access; and
4. professionals at the Pikes Peak Library District offered enthusiastic project support.
We recorded any and all questions through unobtrusive observation of reference professionals in their working environment during weekday, evening, and weekend hours. We recorded only those queries that professionals use a reference collection to answer. We ignored directional questions (e.g. "Where are the rest rooms?" or "Where is the Children's Collection?") and collection questions (e.g. "Where do I find Green Eggs and Ham?' or "Does the library have a Cajun cookbook?"). In the end, the sample contained 209 questions. As expected, the reference questions included both simple questions fit for conventional ready reference work and those requiring research time and a number of tools for solution, if using print sources. The questions included a wide variety of subjects.23
Using the sample collection of reference questions, the next task was to determine which questions we could be answered using the Internet. By labeling a question as not answerable, we are not saying that the information is not on the Internet. Given the size of the Internet, or most large databases for that matter, there is no practical way to determine that something is nowhere in the retrieval pool. We applied the same judgment criteria that reference professionals commonly employ in practice: a question was "unanswerable" if, after using our reference knowledge and experience, we could not find an answer to the question. For the purpose of our study, we limited research time on individual questions to ten minutes.
After judging whether or not we could answer the reference questions using Internet sources, we employed an interrater reliability check on the judgment process to make certain our findings were generally consistent among similar reference professionals. Information retrieval researchers have discovered that the following five demographic or background elements lend consistency to judgments like those made in our inquiry:
* the occupation of those doing the evaluation
* the judges' work experience
* the evaluators' research interests
* their level of education, and
* their level of exposure or experience with research and retrieval tools.24
If the judges are a rough match in these five profile screens, their judgments should also roughly match. Otherwise, the matter being judged is highly variable and incapable of yielding data from which to draw conclusions. In our case, if one judge found that a significant number of questions can be answered using the Internet, and another judge of the same profile found that few questions have solution with Internet tools, the judgment process itself is flawed yielding little practical information.
Veracity and the Internet
Finding answers to patron's questions is only one way to determine the Internet's potential value for reference practice. The answers the Internet provides might be flawed, since self-publishing is more of an option in the current network environment. A number of issues surround the concept of veracity and reference sources applicable to both the Internet or any other reference tool:
* Answers that sources provide need to be correct.
* They have to come from reputable sources.
* The answers must be complete.
* The material has to be current.
A common complaint about using large-scale networks as a research tool is that much of the information available would not pass muster using the sort of collection development criteria commonly used in libraries.25 In order to get some clue as to the veracity or quality of the answers we found using Internet tools, we compared a random sample of our answers to those found in traditional reference sources. We divided our findings into six categories:
1. The Internet-obtained answer was verified with a traditional reference source.
2. The Internet-obtained answer differed from that found in a traditional source.
3. The Internet answer could not be verified in a traditional reference source.
4. An answer to the query could be found using traditional sources, but not using the Internet.
5. An answer to the query could be found in either a traditional or Internet source.
6. The kind and quality of the query does not lend itself to any reasonable veracity check.
Though a full consideration of the usefulness of the Internet for reference practice has to take veracity into consideration, it should be pointed out that traditional library collections and reference tools are also plagued by all the issues that surround veracity.26
Durability and the Internet
Beyond veracity, there is the issue of the ephemeral nature of the sites and information available on the Internet. A common complaint about Internet sites is that they are fugitive at best. Even if there are multiple Internet sites providing valuable information to satisfy reference questions, are those sites here today and gone tomorrow? Does the constantly changing nature of the Internet greatly affect its viability as a research tool? In order to get some idea about the site durability, we tracked all the sites we used to answer reference questions. We tracked them through the entire duration of our project (eighteen months), to determine the staying power of individual sites.
Though no data is available about just how fugitive content is on the Internet, the conventional wisdom applied to traditional publications probably holds. The more reputable, funded, and wellknown the site's sponsor is, the more likely the site will remain active, providing information for future inquiry.
Limitations of the Study
This study seeks to determine the usefulness of the Internet for reference practice. Our study does not delve into the whole notion of relevance and information retrieval judgments. Many authors have exposed the subjective and personal nature of all that goes into finding an answer to someone's reference query.27 Project evaluators found information they judged as a match to questions in the sample. Whether or not the information found would have satisfied the patrons posing the queries is another issue entirely. The judgments made in this project center on topic relevance alone; information was or was not found that appeared to answer a given question.
The project used a variety of reference tools and Web sites to discover answers to queries. Even though a number of services are available via the Internet, we did not use fee services or commercially available databases (e.g. Dialog, FirstSearch, or the online version of the Encyclopaedia Britannica) to answer questions. Access to fee-based services certainly would add to the arsenal of tools that any researcher could use to answer questions using the Internet alone.
Whatever the outcome of our inquiry, this project does not seek to suggest that the Internet is the best tool for answering a given question. For a variety of reasons (familiarity, speed, veracity, access), a practicing professional may conclude that an in-house print or electronic source is superior to an Internet source to answer a particular question. Our research study only sought to discover what a researcher could do in answering reference questions given the content available from Internet sources alone. It should also be noted that our durability check was able to track sites for only a limited time period. A true durability check would require tracking sites for a span of years.
Project Findings
The first criterion we used to judge the Internet was depth. Can a reference professional find answers to a range of questions using the Internet as a reference tool? In our 209-question sample, we found answers to 129 questions or 61.7 percent of the sample using the Internet alone. We used Cohen's Kappa, an interrater reliability measure, to test whether or not similar judges would have found the same results. The Kappa value obtained was .74, an acceptable level of reliability.28 Although we used a number of Internet sources to attempt solution to the questions (newsgroups, gopher sites, and search engines), the bulk of the answers ultimately came from World Wide Web sites.
The second criterion used to evaluate the Internet as a reference tool was veracity. In comparing the information available from Internet sources to that which was available through a conventional reference collection, we found the following for the thirty randomly sampled questions from our pool:
* For fifteen answers, the Internet-obtained answer was verified with a traditional source.
* For one answer, the Internet answer differed from the traditional reference source.
* For two questions, an Internet answer was found, but nothing from a traditional source.
* For six questions, a traditional source yielded results, but the Internet did not.
* For five, neither the Internet nor traditional reference questions provided an answer.
* For one question, the query did not lend itself to any reasonable veracity check.
The third assessment used to evaluate the Internet's utility in reference work was durability. While tracking our sample for eighteen months. We found only 31 of the 131 sites used for question resolution had changed. Of the thirty-one that changed, seven changed only their Internet address. One of our reference sites started charging a fee for access. The remaining twenty-three sites ceased Internet publication. Of the twenty-three questions that depended on those sites for resolution, we found fifteen alternative sites providing similar information. Additionally, of those questions judged to be unanswerable in our original inquiry, six new sites emerged providing answers.
Conclusions and Implications for Practice
We used three common judgment criteria from which to assess the Internet's value at delivering the kind of information services that patrons demand: depth, accuracy, and durability. Using any and all of these screens, the Internet demonstrated itself a valuable and reliable tool. Beyond merely stating that the Internetcan make a positive impact on reference services, our research points to four implications surrounding the question of the Internet and library practice:
1. The Internet is a worthwhile reference investment. Our project shows that a significant percentage of actual, varied reference questions can find solution using the Internet, its sites and tools. The 61.7 percent figure is even more astounding when it is compared to any of the reference success rates published in literature for in-house print and electronic sources.29
Our target library's reference collection was as effective as the Internet in answering the kind of queries found in our pool. However, the Pikes Peak Library District expends more than $500,000 each year to construct a collection that can answer these questions. Simple Internet access can be had for far less. Providing large-scale network access can be a time-consuming, expensive endeavor. It is worth the investment in terms of reference output.
2. Some libraries have much to gain from Internet access. Given the efficacy of the Internet for supplying answers to patrons' questions, a library with a limited reference collection should consider funding Internet access to quickly buttress their ability to field a wide range of questions. This strategy is preferable to slowly adding print and electronic products to the library collection.
A small nearby library provides a clear example of this. With a small reference budget of only seven thousand dollars per year, we were able to answer only fourteen of our previously mentioned sample of thirty questions. Each researcher was able to find answers to twenty-two of these questions using the Internet. Thus, small and rural libraries, those that the Internet surveys reveal as having the least expectation for network access, would benefit the most from Internetaccess.
3. The Internet should figure prominently in the reference bag of tools. Our success in using the Internet to answer actual reference queries demonstrates that research professionals should view the Internet as an instrument of choice rather than a tool of last resort. As with any resource, practitioners will learn by experience when the Internet is to be preferred to other sources.
4. The Internet as a whole is a stable reference medium. For more than eighteen months most of the queries in our sample could find resolution through the same Internet site. Though there was some change, alternatives were readily available to fill the gap. Sites are constantly being created that answer new questions.
Directions for Further Research
Beyond our inquiry, several projects are can be suggested to examine the relationship of libraries and large-scale networks. One possible line of inquiry involves the impact of innovations on organizations. Does the Internet's presence really change the way libraries do business? Even if the Internet is a valuable resource for finding the information that patrons require, will staff use the tool? If not, what will it take to get them to incorporate this technology into the library's workflow? Does training have anything to do with how much a given searcher gets out of the Internet?
There are a number of information systems questions remaining to be answered that come as a result of library interaction with the Internet. Does the type of network installation, the number of network access points, or the kinds of hardware and software offered have anything to do with reference professionals use and perceptions of the Internet?
Our project used a number of Web search engines to find answers to patron questions. Each boasts of advanced productivity and search features. While there are a number of reviews of Internet search systems, the whole field of information retrieval is still lacks a meaningful measure of search system effectiveness.
Finally, how will large-scale networking affect society's perception of librarians and library practice? Able examination and discussion about what technology is doing for the library profession for good and ill exists in the literature.so Will library involvement in these technologies enrich librarians' jobs by adding another tool to serve customers or will advancing network technologies marginalize our presence in the research chain?
References
References
References
1. H. G. Wells. World Brain. (London: Adamantine Press, 1938); Vennevar Bush, "As We May Think," Atlantic Monthly 19 (1945): 112-14.
2. Ed Krol. The Whole Internet: User's Guide cC Catalog. (Sebastopol, CA: O'Reilly & Associates, 1996).
3. Dennis G. Perry, Steven H. Blumenthal, and Robert M. Hinden, "The ARPANET and the DARPA Internet,"Library Hi Tech 6, number 2 (1988): 51-62.
4. The American Memory Project [Online]. URL http://1cweb2.loc.gov.libproxy1.usc.edu/ammem/
5. Netfirst Product Description [Online]. URL http://www.oclc.org.libproxy1.usc.edu/oclc/netfirst/
References
6. "Many Libraries Providing Internet Access to Patrons," Computers in Libraries 15 (Nov./Dec. 1995): 24.
7. John Carlos Bertot, Charles R. McClure, and Douglas L. Zweizig, "The 1996 National Survey of Public Libraries and the Internet: Progress and Issues: Final Report" (Washington, DC: National Commission on Libraries and Information Science, 1996), 13.
References
8. The Yale List of Libraries on the Internet [Online]. URL gopher://libgopher.cis.yale.edu
9. John Carlos Bertot, Charles R. McClure, and Douglas L. Zweizig, 14.
10. Susan Page, "Clinton: Give Schools, Libraries Free Internet, USA TODAY Oct 11, 1996, sec. A, p. 2.
11. CNET's Glossary [Online]. URL Karen G. Schneider, The Internet Access Cookbook: A Librarian's Commonsense Guide to Low-cost Connections (New York: Neal-Schuman, 1996).
12. Dedicated High Speed Circuits. URL http:// www.sni.net/sni/products/dedicate.html
References
13. Janet Balas, "The Internet and Reference Services," Computers in Libraries 15 (1995): 39-41.
14. Hugh Thompson. Internet Resources: A Subject Guide. (Chicago: Association of College & Research Libraries, 1995).
15. Geetali Basu, "Using Internet for Reference: Myths vs. Realities," Computers in Libraries 15 (1995): 38-40.
16. Scott Mellendorf, "Pounding the Pavement with Purpose: Utilizing the Information Superhighway for Daily Work Tasks," RQ 35 (Winter 1995): 231-35.
References
17. Teaching Critical Evaluation Skills for World Wide Web Resources. [Online] URL http://www.science. widener.edu/-withers/webeval.htm
18. Chuck Koutnik, "The World Wide Web Is Here: Is the End of Printed Reference Sources Near?" RQ (Spring 1997): 422-29.
19. "Libraries Online! Comes to NC PL: Public Library of Charlotte & Mecklenburg County Opened a High-tech Branch Partially Supported by a $385,000 Grant from Microsoft,"Library Journal 121 (Sept. 15, 1996): 14.
20. Clifford Stoll. Silicon Snake Oil: Second Thoughts on the Information Highway. (New York: Anchor Books, 1995).
References
21. Cyril Cleverdon, Jack Mills, and Michael Keen. Factors Determining the Performance of Indexing Systems. (Cranfield: College of Aeronautics, 1966).
22. A recent example of tests that employ limited numbers of contrived questions to determine the performance of search systems is: Joel Strauch, "The Web
References
versus the Library: An Information Show Down," PC Novice 8 (April 1997): 80-83.
23. Internet Project Queries [Online]. URL http://library. tamu.edu/wcl/ref/facstaff/zumalt/netref.htm
24. Alan M. Rees. A Field Experimental Approach to the Study of Relevance Assessments in Relation to Document Searching (Cleveland: Center for Documentation and Communication Research, Western Reserve University, 1965); Mark Evan Rorvig, "An Experiment in Human Preferences for Documents in a Simulated Information System" (Ph.D. diss., University of California at Berkeley, 1985).
References
25. Jan Alexander and Marsha Tate, "Teaching Critical Evaluation Skills for World Wide Web Resources," Computers in Libraries (Nov./Dec. 1996): 49-55.
26. According to this respected publisher, Pikes Peak is the tallest mountain in the Rockies. In fact, there are 30 peaks higher than it in Colorado. Cities of the United States: A Compilation of Current Information on
References
Economic, Cultural, Geographic, and Social Conditions (Detroit: Gale, 1994).
27. Taemin Kim Park, "The Nature of Relevance in Information Retrieval," Library Quarterly 63, number 3 (1993): 318-51; Linda Schamber and Michael B Eisenberg, "On Defining Relevance," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 31 (Winter 1991): 238-40.
References
28. Kenneth S. Bordens and Bruce B. Abbott. Research Design and Methods: A Process Approach. (London: Mayfield Publishing, 1991), 152-54.
29. Joan C. Durrance, "Reference Success: Does the 55 Percent Rule Tell the Whole Story?" Library Journal 114 (April 15, 1989): 31-6.
30. Roma M. Harris, "Information Technology and the De-skilling of Librarians; or, the Erosion of a Woman's Profession," Computers in Libraries 12 (Jan. 1992): 8.
AuthorAffiliation
Joseph R. Zumalt (jzumalt@lib-qw.tamu.edu) is campus business reference librarian at West Campus Library, Texas A&M University.
Robert W. Pasicznyuk (bpasiczn@ppld.org) is systems analyst, The Pikes Peak Library District, Colorado Springs, Colorado.
Word count: 4995
Copyright American Library Association 1999
Zumalt, J. R., & Pasicznyuk, R. W. (1999). The internet and reference services: A real-world test of internet utility. Reference & User Services Quarterly, 38(2), 165-172. Retrieved from http://libproxy.usc.edu/login?url=https://search-proquest-com.libproxy1.usc.edu/docview/217914870?accountid=14749
