Studying the impacts of the Internet without assuming technological determinism


Headnote
Studying the impacts of the Internet without assuming technological determinism'
Developing countries generally have low levels of Internet services, and as a result require different approaches to impact measurement than developed countries. A conceptual framework is proposed which accepts a role for technological innovation, but which rejects technological determinism. It recognizes that economic, social, political and cultural factors affect the penetration and use of the Internet. It emphasizes direct and indirect impacts of the Internet on people, while including impacts on institutions and the environmental factors and policies that affect institutional impacts. Ultimately the Internet is an induced innovation, but developing countries still suffer from the Matthew principle - that those who have most will be given still more.
Impacts of the Internet range from communications cost savings, to changes in performance of individual businesses, NGOs, government agencies, and schools, to changes in performance of markets, to those measured in terms of economic growth, equity, health status, knowledge, and environmental quality. The overall view of the impacts of the Internet emerges (as does the picture in a jigsaw puzzle) from combining many studies of specific effects, each conveying a part of the picture.
The majority of the people of the world live in low and middle income countries; they have the greatest need of the Internet to help solve the pressing problems of poverty, and they are the least prepared to use the technology and appropriate its benefits. Clearly great benefits are available to developing countries from appropriate uses of even their scarce Internet networks.
Many of the institutions affected by the Internet are international. Internet impacts on these international institutions must be confronted. Thus developing countries may face significant risks from participation in international financial, labor and goods and services markets, because of significant gaps in connectivity and in knowledge and information. On the other hand, they may benefit greatly from power uses of the Internet abroad, of which Africans are scarcely aware, such as famine early warning and epidemiological alert systems.
Donor agencies encourage the development of the Internet in developing countries, and especially in Africa. Several have agreed to work collaboratively to learn the lessons from their experience. Such efforts are important if the potential of the Internet is to be realized in developing countries, the risks inherent in the Internet are to be avoided or ameliorated, and the net effect to be enhanced equity and social and economic growth.
Introduction
In 1746, at the grand convent of the Carthusians in Paris, Jean-Antoine Nollet placed 200 monks in line, each linked to the next by a 25-foot long iron wire. Conducting the world's first test of electrical signal propagation in a network, Nollet connected the chain to a battery.
The simultaneous exclamations and contortions of a mile-long line of monks revealed that electricity could be transmitted over a great distance; and as far as Nollet could tell, it covered that distance instantly [1].
Would that all impacts of networking were so visible, and few so painful. The theme of this paper is the `impact of the Internet'. It is a theme that reeks of technological determinism, suggesting that the networking technologies and the underlying information and communications technologies on which they rely are in themselves affecting society. Rapid improvements in these technologies have been related to the rapid increase in their use. Indeed, technological determinists might suggest:
Information technology is like electricity in its ability to transform the organization. Unlike electricity, however, the latest technological boom has spread wide across industries and penetrated deeply into corporations in a relatively short period of time [2].
The position of Marx and Smith seems more relevant:
In spite of the existence of an engineering profession, technology is not an organized institution; it has no members or stated positions; nor does it initiate actions. How can we reasonably think of this abstract, disembodied, quasi-metaphysical entity, or one of its artifactual stand-ins (e.g. the computer), as the initiator of actions capable of controlling human destiny [3]?
The penetration, utilization, and impacts of the technology depend on social and economic factors, and on the actions taken within countries relevant to the Internet.
What impacts are of interest?2
One of the better studies of the Internet in Africa focuses on the cost savings achieved by African users who substitute email for telephone calls and faxes [5]. Surely such consequences of use of the Internet are significant, and should be considered as 'impacts'. A review of the literature on Internet impacts quickly shows an interest in the consequences in terms of the objectives of many organizations: schools, legal offices, health facilities, private voluntary organizations, governmental agencies, manufacturing firms, financial service firms, etc. We too must consider such consequences as 'impacts'.
Further, I have interviewed senior managers in donor organizations, and they ask, `What are the developmental consequences of the Internet?' They must consider the value of investments in the Internet versus investments in other technologies or programs in terms of reduction of poverty, improvement of health, improvement of education, economic growth, improving citizen participation in governance, promoting the rule of law, and preservation of the environment. But, in Africa, with more than 99.9% of the population unconnected to the Internet, how are we to trace Internet effects on such broad developmental concerns?
These interviews indicated more interest in the impacts of policies than in the impacts of the Internet per se. What policies and policy instruments can one use to make the impacts of the Internet more equitable? To help developing countries utilize the Internet more fully and effectively to promote economic growth? Thus, one is faced with the difficult task of determining not only the consequences of the introduction of the Internet, but also how those differ from the developments that would have occurred under other circumstances.
A conceptual framework
There will be many studies of the impacts of the Internet. A framework is required to suggest how those studies may be interrelated, and indeed how one may extrapolate from relatively narrow studies to understand more general phenomena. Thus, one might expect many studies of the effects of the introduction of the Internet in businesses, and some studies of the effects of the introduction of the Internet in markets (to improve dissemination of information among buyers and sellers). Understanding of the penetration and use of the Internet in a region, combined with understanding of the effects of use and non-use of the technology in firms and in markets, should contribute to the understanding of the effects of the Internet on, say, the small-and-medium-- enterprise sector or on a specific industry.
In this sense the framework may be considered to provide a `jigsaw puzzle' approach, in which a picture of the large scale impacts of the Internet emerges from piecing together many small studies, each providing understanding of a portion of the whole.
The difficulty of understanding the impacts of the Internet should not be underestimated. For example, a case-control study of small enterprises using and not using the Internet would be likely to show considerable differences in effects on companies within each group - perhaps better illustrating the range of effects available to the enterprises rather than any single 'impact'. Moreover, the difference between groups would be illustrative of the differential impacts of the Internet on users versus non-users. If one were looking at booksellers in Africa who were or were not going online, it might well be difficult, if not impossible, to identify the impact of Internet booksellers like Amazon.com as they affected the African market, or the effect of authors and publishers using the Internet to improve the quality or lower the prices of their products, and thus affecting the goods sold by the booksellers. Similarly, it might be difficult or impossible to identify the impact of the Internet in opening other information choices for the clientele of the booksellers, as an impact on their market. The best chance to understand such complex impacts is to step back and look for larger patterns among many diverse studies.
Drawing on the framework put forth in a US National Academy of Sciences publication [6], a reductionist approach is proposed. It is illustrated in Figure 1.
The framework considers the penetration of the Internet and its utilization by those connected. The penetration and utilization are seen as affected by technological forces, as well as by policies and 'environmental' forces outside of the control of policy makers. Similarly, the framework considers institutions and impacts of the Internet on institutions. The framework recognizes that the institutions are inter-linked in complex patterns. Impacts on people may be either direct, stemming from their 'consumer' uses of the Internet, or indirect arising as a result of their participation in institutions, or as a result of changes in the ways institutions serve their clients.
Technological change as a driving force
Technological change clearly underlies the development and growth of the Internet. Moore's Law states that the processing power of the transistor chip doubles every 18 months, (and thus technological change drives costs down);3 Gilder's Law states that communications costs will halve and speed will double every 18 months for the foreseeable future. As the number of platforms using a piece of software increases, the fixed costs of producing software can be amortized over a larger number of users. Thus software costs per computer (software power or complexity held constant) have gone down with the growth of installed computer capacity. Moreover, as the market expands, more and more sophisticated software applications can be profitably marketed, thereby increasing options for the user.
放大此图像。
Figure 1.
Network economics are also important. The value of a telephone network increases with the square of the number of users.4 I would suggest that for the World Wide Web, benefits increase even more rapidly with size. Participants on the Web post information as well as search for the information. As the number of hosts connected to the Web increases, then the benefits resulting from each page posted tend to increase to the poster. Moreover, authoring software is amortized over more users, and the costs of each page posted tend to decrease. Consequently, as the number of people on the Web increases, so too does the amount of information each posts.5 Each surfer benefits not only from the new postings on each new web server, but from the added postings on existing servers. In addition, Metcalfe's Law holds that if you connect any number, n, of computers you get n squared potential value. Thus inherent in Internet technology are increasing returns to increasing network size.
Following Thomas Hughes [71, attention can be directed to `technological systems' beyond the network. The Internet technological system includes a portfolio of applications (email, listserves, chat rooms, the World Wide Web, e-commerce, Internet telephone, Internet fax, Internet radio, etc.). The evolving physical network makes these applications feasible, while the applications justify the network; each added killer application adds value to the network for its users. Indeed, with the convergence of many information and communications technologies, the technological system of synergistic networks and applications may well extend beyond the Internet to include broadcast media, telephony and computers in general.
These three technological sources of Internet growth are mutually supportive. If, for example, reductions in the cost of hardware and software allow Internet services to be offered at lower prices, and the number of subscribers increases correspondingly, then the larger user base will lead to still more benefits per subscriber, and the demand for Internet services will increase. Similarly, if a new killer application comes along, increasing the value of Internet connectivity to the subscriber, more will subscribe; the larger subscriber base will again lead to more benefits per subscriber, and the demand for Internet services will increase still further.
Penetration and utilization
Figure 2 illustrates how connectivity and use of the Internet are addressed. Supply of and demand for Internet services vary with price; an equilibrium price is one where supply equals demand, and that point should establish both the service penetration and the price. In developing countries markets tend to be imperfect and the supply and demand for Internet services might be limited by infrastructure and other variables. Consideration of penetration also involves consideration of the quality of connectivity in terms of bandwidth, service quality, and reliability.
放大此图像。
Figure 2.
There is an old saying, `You can lead a horse to water, but you can't make it drink.' Similarly, you can connect a man to the Internet, but you cannot make him email or surf. It is not just the penetration of the Internet that seems most likely to determine its impact, but also its use or non-use. While those without access to the Internet can be assumed not to use it, the utilization of Internet capacity by those with access cannot be assumed.
The term 'content' normally refers to the content posted on the World Wide Web, although by extension it might be used to refer to the content of email traffic and other communications via the Internet. Currently most web content is available to the surfer without cost. Nevertheless it seems likely that 'market' considerations can be useful in discussing content. Thus it would seem likely that the larger the number of readers likely to browse a website, the more willing would be the owner of the site to post material. As the ability of buyers and sellers to find each other in a market is of concern, so is the ability of those posting material on the Web to reach relevant readers and the ability of surfers to find that which they seeks
The pattern of penetration and utilization of the Internet is also of interest. What are the relative importance of academia, the business sector, government and civil society? What portion of users are foreign, and what nationals? Does utilization of existing connections differ among these groups?
The framework suggests that the utilization of the Internet by those that are connected is influenced by cultural, social and economic factors, and can be influenced by policies. Thus, in Africa, Internet and telephone charges are often per unit time connected and are high, so that cost is likely to limit use. Use is higher in universities and NGOs than in government, and this may be related to organizational climate. Low levels of education and widespread lack of experience with information based decision making also seem likely to lead to low levels of Internet utilization.
Institutional impacts
Many studies deal with institutional impacts of the Internet, several emphasizing impacts in developing countries. Discussions of measurement of impacts on organizations include impacts on organizations in general [91, and on specific kinds of organizations such as (governmental) organizations involved in agriculture [ 10], civil society organizations [11], relatively large developing country enterprises [ 121, small and medium enterprises [13], and micro and small enterprises [ 14]. Similarly, discussions have focused on the impacts at the project level [15]. The staff of the Acacia Project is conducting a study of the impacts of telecenters in Africa [ 16]. A recent National Academy of Sciences report included discussion of the impacts at the level of the household and community [17]. More general discussions of social and economic impacts exist [ 18]. More general frameworks for studying the impact of information [19, 20] can be modified to focus on impacts of the Internet.
In developing countries, impacts of the use of the Internet should be greater than the direct employment and business impacts of the provision of Internet services. The impacts of non-use of the Internet (notably in Africa) may be even more significant.
Institutions of concern include formal organizations, such as businesses, schools, hospitals and health centers, non-governmental organizations, and associations. There are of course many other institutions (which are not formal organizations) which can be affected by the Internet. These would include markets, communities, and families.
Figure 3 exemplifies how the conceptual framework deals with institutional impacts using a business enterprise as an example. The enterprise is seen as a system composed of a number of component parts. The diagram suggests a relatively small organization, composed of a number of interrelated work groups (e.g. departments). A reductionist approach to studying the direct impact of the use of the Internet in such an organization would look at the use of the Internet in the various work groups. Typically, the impacts sought would be relevant to any or all of a number of parameters: efficiency of resource use, effects on organizational functions, or accomplishment of work group objectives. The direct impact on the overall organization might be inferred from the aggregate of work group impacts, and from the structure and processes of the organization. A further impact might be sought in the ways in which the structure and process of the organizations themselves adapt or are modified as a result of the introduction of the Internet.
Similarly, the measure of the direct impact of the Internet on a market depends on its impact on the entities that trade in the market, on market structure and processes, and on how the structure and processes are modified in response to the Internet. Impacts on many other institutions can be considered, including the family, community, civil society, political, governance, industries, and professional associations and networks.
With time, institutions will self-organize to adapt to the Internet. Such self-organization may be both:
teleological or planned, as when executives of a group of enterprises develops a network strategy for those enterprises to collaborate via the Internet, or when entrepreneurs create new enterprises to accomplish social tasks in new ways made possible by the Internet; and
teleonomic or unplanned, as when feedback in the form of increased profits and investment are used to increase the size of an enterprise successfully utilizing the Internet, or when economic selection by markets results in the disappearance of enterprises which no longer compete effectively in an Internet environment.
Indeed, the very idea of the institution may change; for example, the business enterprise may eventually be seen less as a free standing entity defined by relatively closed boundaries, and more as an entity with openboundaries which participates in various networks of producers and consumers [211.
Figure 3 also suggests that the behavior of the enterprise is influenced by other institutions. Thus the owners', managers' and employees' reaction to the Internet may be strongly affected by:
the signals that they detect in input and output markets;
support from community institutions (such as chambers of commerce);
support from associations (such as trade associations);
government policies and services;
by the actions of partner enterprises (suppliers, customers).
Indeed, an enterprise might be very strongly affected by the Internet through these other institutions even though it itself did not connect or utilize the technology. If, for example, its competitors use the Internet to obtain advantages in input and output markets and to increase productivity, a firm not using the Internet may find itself at a severe competitive disadvantage, and indeed be forced out of business.
Institutions are seen as permeable. Each person, of course, participates in many institutions, and the experience with the Internet in one institutional role can affect other institutional roles. Thus the worker who learns to use the Internet at the office may subsequently use the Internet to participate in activities of his professional society, to communicate with members of his family, and to participate in chat rooms discussing politics. Increased labor mobility engendered by intra-family use of the Internet could affect enterprises by changing labor markets.
As described above, understanding of the overall impact of the Internet will develop from understanding many individual studies of specific impacts, and how they fit together. However, for such an approach to function well, it is important that studies within institutions include descriptions of the relevant behavior of other institutions. Thus, studies of the impacts of the Internet on firms should include considerations of the markets in which those firms acquired resources (primary and intermediate goods, labor, financing) and sold their goods and services, relevant government policies, and the action or lack thereof of chambers of commerce and trade associations.
Specifically, the conceptual framework recognizes that the response of an institution to the Internet is conditioned by policies and by cultural, social and economic factors. Thus, the ways schools are affected by their access to and use of the Internet might be affected by policies of the Ministry of Education, as well as by factors such as the openness of the society, the general level of education, the participation of families in school activities, and the willingness of the private sector to encourage schools to utilize the Internet.
Sectoral analysis
How will the Internet affect:
economic growth;
the distribution of wealth and income;
disease, disability, discomfort and death in the population;
the ability of people to participate in their own governance;
food availability and nutrition;
the knowledge people command and utilize;
etc.
Often, perhaps usually, individual policy makers are interested not in the entire spectrum of such issues, but in a single one.
The proposed conceptual framework allows for the selection of a group of institutions for each such issue. Thus, if one is interested in the impact of the Internet on public health, one would focus on institutions in the health sector: a ministry of health, health service systems managed by non-governmental organizations, private organizations offering health services on a fee-for-service basis, the markets for pharmaceuticals, medical supplies, health care finance, and labor in the medical fields, and associations of health professionals.
It should be noted that this separation of a system or sector for analysis from its background of the society in general is an analytic convenience. Continuing the example of the health sector, it is well known that the health of populations is not only, or perhaps even primarily, a function of the health services industry and its associated institutions. An affluent, well-fed, well-educated population living in a hygienic environment will generally be healthy, while a poor, undernourished, poorly educated population living in filth will generally be unhealthy in spite of the efforts of its health workers. Thus the impact of the Internet on health may be studied in terms of its effects on the performance of institutions in the health sector, but the effects of the Internet on economic growth, food production and distribution, education, and the environment may ultimately be more significant for health.
Impacts on people
Institutional impacts of the Internet are a useful topic for study because of the considerable importance of teleonomic processes in institutions. Institutions may exhibit orderly behavior that is not planned, but they should not be reified. The impact of the Internet on an institution is not important per se. Impacts on people are.
The conceptual framework identifies three classes of impacts of the Internet on people:
impact stemming from direct (consumer) uses;
indirect, from their participation in institutions;
indirect, from changes in the performance of institutions of which they are clients.
The direct impact of the Internet on the individual user seems to be the most commonly discussed, probably because it is the simplest to conceptualize and to measure. It seems unlikely to be the most important. Few people spend a large part of their income on the Internet, and one must assume that the marginal net benefits of such use are comparable to the cost of Internet connectivity.
The indirect impact of the Internet on a participant in an institution may be quite significant. Consider, for example, the employee who loses his job because his company is unable to compete with others that use the Internet more effectively and goes out of business. Or consider the stockholders in those companies that used the Internet effectively to increase productivity and profits, and thus enhanced their stock values, or the bonuses likely to have gone to managers of such companies.
Indeed, the third class of benefits may be still greater. If, for example, power users of the Internet in biomedical research are able to develop vaccines by using their computer power more rapidly, or indeed able to develop vaccines that would not have been possible without such computer support, the benefits to the community may be immense!
In the previous section of this paper, it was suggested that non-use of the Internet might result in serious negative consequences. The examples above also illustrate the possibility that recipients of important benefits from the Internet may not themselves be Internet users, or indeed even be aware of the Internet use from which they benefited. Thus, the beneficiaries of new vaccines developed through power applications of supercomputers and wide bandwidth communications media are quite unlikely to be aware of the role of information and communications technology in vaccine development, much less to have been involved themselves in such uses.
Therefore, a complex pattern of distribution of Internet services is probably required to maximize benefits. Such a pattern that may give priority to Internet Ii connectivity for power users in critical applications areas, rather than to wide distribution of basic connectivity to consumers. Indeed, it might even be that greater benefits would come to Africans from high level connectivity for vaccine researchers in Europe and the US than from broad penetration of Internet services to households in Africa itself.
Technological determinism versus induced innovation; the Matthew principle versus deterministic policies
The conceptual framework (Figure 1, above) identifies technological change as one of the factors responsible for the rapid increase in the penetration and use of the Internet. However, the conceptual framework also suggests that the penetration and utilization of the Internet and the institutional impacts of that penetration and use are dependent on environmental, social, and economic conditions, and on the policies in place. This situation leads naturally to consideration of the Internet as an `induced innovation' [22]. The Internet is certainly best viewed as having been invented in developed countries, and the technology transferred to developing countries (from the point of view of developing countries it is not an `induced inver<tion'). However, the argument above suggests that the innovations is to a significant degree induced by factors internal to developing countries. Essentially this framework rejects a technological determinist position that the Internet is an 'autonomous' technology, rather placing on developing country policy makers the responsibility for creating an environment that induces a pattern of innovation that benefits the populations they serve.
Observed impacts should also be attributed to:
policies influencing Internet availability, use and non-use and the ways institutions allocate costs and benefits of the Internet, versus
environmental factors that influence institutions to benefit or to fail to benefit from the Internet capacity provided and its use.
Clearly, richer, more educated groups and countries have more access to the Internet and are likely to benefit more from it 123]. Thus, the Matthew principle applies to the Intemet.9 Yet it is clear that good policies and the development of appropriate institutions in developing countries can promote more rapid penetration of the Internet, its more appropriate utilization, and, thus, more beneficial and equitable impacts. If the Matthew principle governs and the `digital divide' widens, how much of the gap should be considered as a further repercussion of the poverty of developing nations, and how much should be attributed to the failure to develop adequate policies and institutions? While the question is essentially unanswerable, it should be noted that more generally development success has been strongly linked to good policies and good institutions [24].
The Internet in the developing world
Five-sixths of the people of the world live in low and middle income countries; the average per capita GDP for two billion people who live in low income countries was $350 in 1997, and for the nearly three billion who lived in middle income countries it was $1,890. Infant mortality in middle income countries was six times, and in low income countries sixteen times that of high income countries. Low and middle income countries benefited comparatively little and late from technological advances of the past. Even while the Green Revolution revolutionized agriculture in Asia, Africa saw decreases in per capita agricultural production. Developing countries have the world's greatest needs for the advances promised from the Internet, as well as the world's least prepared physical, institutional and human infrastructure to realize these advantages.
It was estimated in May 1999, that there were 171.25 million people connected to the Internet worldwide [25]. Assuming a global population of six billion, this means that more than 97% of the people in the world are not connected to the Internet. Most of the wired are in developed countries. Mike Jensen estimates that in Africa (excluding South Africa) there are 4,100 people per Internet user [26]; Africa meets the Ivory Snow' test: it is more than 99.9% uncontaminated by the Internet. Thus, the impacts of non-use of the Internet may well predominate in developing countries and in Africa in particular.
Penetration differs radically from country to country. Figure 4 is based on data prepared by Mike Jensen for Internet connectivity in Sub-Saharan Africa [26]. It relates Internet connectivity to per capita GDP." The upper regression line is for countries which are the focus of the Leland Initiative, and the lower for those which are not. The Leland Initiative [27], which seeks to promote the penetration of the Internet in Africa, focuses on countries which appear promising for its purposes, and then engages with their governments in a policy dialog promoting privatization and competition among Internet Service Providers (ISPs), cost-based pricing of telecommunications services for the Internet, and freedom of speech in terms of Internet content. The Leland Initiative has provided subsidies for Internet hardware to countries with which it has signed memoranda of understanding about Internet policies, and has conducted training of (potential) Internet users. The figure suggests not only that Internet penetration increases with increased per capita GDP, but that policies advocated by the Leland Initiative are conducive to increased penetration.
Rob Schware summarized data from a 1997-98 survey by the IDRC's Capacity Building for Electronic Communication in Africa (CABECA) project as follows:
The survey found that there was as yet little government use of the Internet: only one per cent of users in Ethiopia, and only six per cent in Zambia, were government employees. The highest number of users belonged to non-government organizations (NGOs), private companies, and universities. The ratio of nationals to non-nationals varied between countries: 44 per cent of users surveyed in Zambia were nationals as compared to 90 per cent in Ghana.
The survey findings suggest that the average level of email use is one per day, sending and receiving. Email is used for general correspondence and document exchange, technical advice, managing projects, arranging meetings, and exchanging research ideas, although its use is still limited for finding and accessing formal information resources. ... The WWW is still a relatively underutilized resource, although 40 per cent of Zambian users questioned had conducted literature searches on the Web 128].
Thus use of the Internet in Africa by those connected is still quite low. For comparison, the Neilsen/Netratings panel reports an average of two hours, forty-one minutes per week surfing the Web in the US [29].
A second comparison can be made based on the Computer Command Index (see the questionnaire presented in the Appendix). The questionnaire was pretested with volunteers belonging to listserves on topics of Internet use and impact, and the sample can be considered to be very active and quite sophisticated users from developed countries. Twenty-six responses are summarized in the table below for all items (except the time using computers, for which there were 16 responses). The scoring method gives five points for a Pentium or equivalent computer as the primary computer, and six points for a Pentium II or equivalent, indicating that these respondents were all using Pentium or more powerful computers.
放大此图像。
Thus, these people were using computers nearly eight hours per day on average, including using the Internet more than three hours per day." Moreover, they were using not only email and the World Wide Web, but (on average) more than one other Internet application. It seems highly unlikely that there are many such users in Africa.
放大此图像。
Figure 4.
In developed countries, some direct indicators of the impact of the Internet involve the growth of investment in and revenues from Internet infrastructure, the GDP of the industry manufacturing such infrastructure, and Internet related employment (network managers, web page designers, etc.). Such analyses are less relevant in developing countries, which will generally not manufacture hardware for the Internet, and which have far sparser penetration. Still, even Sub-Saharan Africa has more than one million people connected to the Internet; if we assume that annual cost is some $800 per connection,13 the Internet budget for the continent would be $800 million. Employment generated by this $800 million per year industry would be significant.
The conceptual framework stresses that the impact of the Internet is understood in terms of institutions, and international institutions must also be considered. Easier said than done! For example, the researcher seeking to understand the impact of the Internet on small and medium size enterprises in West Africa might need to understand how the Internet is affecting world markets in ground nuts, crafts, and tourism services - not an easy task.
Thus, as is well known, financial markets have become increasingly international over the past several decades. It is estimated that business-to-business e-commerce will increase from $43 billion in 1998 to $1.3 trillion in 2003 (while business-to-consumer e-commerce increases from $8 billion to $108 billion in the same period) [31 ]. Markets for intermediate and final goods will be increasingly international (and mediated via the Internet). Labor markets are international, with many developing countries experiencing diasporas of their (educated) workers, and many expatriates from developed countries working in developing countries. Many businesses and NGOs are multinational, and governments are involved with international agencies. Scientific and technological networks are often global.
The knowledge and information gradient between developed and developing countries is steepening. As African countries are increasingly competing with more wired countries in Asia and Latin America, and facing increasing knowledge gaps as compared with developed countries, the impacts of low levels of use or non-use of the Internet appear likely to be severe. Sophisticated Internet users seek to develop markets in Africa, Asia and Latin America for developed country products, as developing countries seek to develop markets in Europe and North America for their products. While increased trade offers great potential for developing countries, there is at least a risk that the superior Internet sophistication of Northern business will engender worsened terms or trade or increased trade deficits for the South.
Many other institutions are also (but less obviously) international. Families and communities use the Internet to communicate internationally. Many ethnic groups are multinational, not only from migration, but also as a result of national boundaries that cross-cut the regions in which the ethnic communities live; and the traditional institutions within these ethnic groups are similarly likely to transcend national boundaries. The underground economy is increasingly international and, unfortunately, criminal cartels engage in a global drug trade. Terrorists have an opportunity to use Internet technology to achieve secure domestic and international communications of a kind available only to governments in the past.
In Africa, governments have been weak and overburdened by portfolios of government services that exceed their available resources. They will be challenged to utilize the Internet to improve services and productivity, and to involve citizens more in governmental decision making. Surely those favoring antidemocratic positions - from technocracy, to demagoguery, to dictatorship - will also see potentials to advance their interests via the Internet. The ability of African governments to assure peace and security may be further eroded as the underground becomes increasingly international and wired.
Some of the most important benefits that will come to Africans from the Internet will be from power applications of which few Africans will be even aware. For example, the Famine Early Warning System (FEWS) [331 applies considerable computer power to remote sensing data, as well as a variety of other social and economic data to identify areas in which food shortages are likely to occur. By providing advance warning it allows governments to take cost-effective steps to avert famine. Note that in this case a relatively small number of power users of information and communications technology are able to develop information, and a relatively modest use of the Internet in Africa allows this information to be rapidly disseminated to key decision makers. A comparable application exists using information and communications technology to predict epidemics [34, 35]. Computer analysis of weather conditions based on remote sensing data allows identification of conditions likely to foster epidemics of rift valley fever and other infectious diseases of men and livestock. The Internet requirements needed to distribute timely warnings to public health and veterinary health officials are modest.
Donor agencies
Foreign assistance is an important factor in the transfer of Internet technology to the developing world. It seems likely that most foreign assistance agencies promote the use of the Internet within their own programs and among their partners; the technology is pervasive in the developed countries in which they are based, and contribute to the quality and efficiency of their programs. Some donor agencies have undertaken specific programs to promote the development of the Internet in developing countries, and especially in Africa [36].
There are some programs that have sought specifically to develop case studies and similar materials on the impacts of the Internet [37]. Importantly, the Acacia Initiative [381 (a $60 million project of the Canadian IDRC), the Leland Initiative (described above) and the infoDev [39] program (supported by a consortium of donors and managed by the World Bank) have agreed to co-operate in their evaluation programs to develop a large body of information on the lessons learned from donor programs, and jointly sponsored a meeting to develop common understandings of methods in the autumn of 1999.
Closing comments
While penetration and use of the Internet are much less in developing countries than in developed, the impacts of the use of the Internet are likely to be important in developing countries. The impacts of non-use of the Internet in an increasingly wired world are also likely to be important.
It seems clear that many of the impacts will be quite positive. The Internet holds great promise for developing countries in communicable disease control. It is an obvious medium for study of environmental data and communications relevant to environmental policies. It offers great potential for the dissemination of policy relevant information to governments and the general public. It provides an obvious medium for the dissemination of educational materials and content, and for co-ordination of educational administration. It could be used to improve food supplies, notably in improving the efficiency of food markets and in disaster early-warning systems. And it could enable developing country enterprises to compete more effectively for markets abroad. Many of these potential benefits are likely to be shared by entire populations, and indeed to benefit the poor and needy even more than the affluent.
However, there are also threats to developing countries. It is not hard to imagine Internet scenarios in which brain drain is increased, financial crises occur more often and in more damaging ways, more wired countries use their information advantage to unfairly exploit the natural resources of developing countries, undesired transfers occur from cultures of countries with more content on the Web to cultures within developing countries, crime is conducted via the Web, insurgents use the Internet effectively in their efforts to destabilize democratic governments, developed country businesses use e-commerce to sell to developing country consumers (thereby increasing capital flight and diverting scarce capital to elite consumer goods rather than growth enhancing investment), or those already benefiting from relative superiority of wealth, power or education are more successful in appropriating the technology than their less advantaged compatriots and use it in ways that increase inequities in their societies.
The case has been made that the penetration of the Internet will depend on policies and environmental factors in the developing countries, that the use of the installed Internet capacity will also depend on policy and environmental factors. It has been stated that the effects of use and non-use will also depend on policy and environmental factors. It is suggested that it is important to distinguish between the impacts that are inherent in the nature of the Internet, those which are subject to policy control, and those which vary from country to country as a result of factors beyond the control of Internet policy makers.
If the promise of the Internet is to be realized in developing countries, if the threats resulting from the development and dissemination of the Internet are to be ameliorated or avoided, and if the net effect of the introduction of the Internet in developing countries is to enhance equity and contribute to social and economic development, then policies will have to be good and effective. A program of studies is needed to develop the understanding on which such policies can be based. Fortunately, a consortium of donor agencies is beginning a co-ordinated effort to develop such a program.

