https://search-proquest-com.libproxy1.usc.edu/docview/312772984/9906BBA520AC4AC9PQ/26?accountid=14749

Celebrate democracy, free speech: [Lake Edition]
Long, SarahAuthor Information. Daily Herald; Arlington Heights, Ill. [Arlington Heights, Ill]10 Aug 2003: 1.


"Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the government for a redress of grievances."
Did you recognize it? The paragraph above is the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. The framers of the Constitution believed that freedom of inquiry and liberty of expression were the hallmarks of a democratic society.
Librarians take the First Amendment very seriously for obvious reasons. Our job is to make materials available to all the people we serve regardless of our own particular tastes or preferences. Sometimes this puts us in awkward situations, especially with regard to installing blocking software or filters on public Internet terminals.
In December 2000, the U.S. Congress passed an appropriations bill that included a requirement that any library receiving federal E- Rate discounts or federal Library Services and Technology Act (LSTA) grant funds would be required to filter all of its Internetterminals. Because filtering blocks access to constitutionally protected speech, the Children's Internet Protection Act (CIPA) provisions were successfully challenged in court by the American Library Association (ALA).
The government appealed this decision, and on June 23, the U.S. Supreme Court reversed the lower court decision. The Supreme Court ruled that the First Amendment does not prohibit Congress from forcing public libraries, as a condition of receiving federal funding, to use software filters to control what patrons and staff access online via library computers. While the ALA did not prevail in having the law declared unconstitutional, the justices did also rule that the law is constitutional only if the mandated filters can be readily disabled upon the request of adult library users. Users do not have to explain why they are making the request.
As you visit libraries in this area, you are likely to see a variety of responses to this decision. Some area libraries purchased Internetfiltering software years ago and it is in place on all computers. Under the new decision, adults may ask that the software be disabled. Other libraries did not purchase Internet filtering software, but may be installing it soon, if they receive E-Rate discounts for Internetaccess, Internet service or internal connections. Libraries in this group may also be purchasing the software if they receive federal LSTA monies for the purchase of computers used to access the Internet or to pay the direct costs associated with accessing the Internet. In any case, staff in libraries using Internet filtering software is obliged to disable blocking software upon request of an adult. Finally, you may visit a library that will not be accepting E-Rate discounts or receiving federal LSTA monies and has decided not to filter any or all of their Internet access computers.
It's messy living in a democracy. Everyone has an opinion and feels empowered to share it. Other people's opinions can be annoying at best and maddening at worst. But democracy sure beats all the alternatives. Celebrate democracy by checking out the U.S. Constitution at www.usconstitution.net/. For more information on the recent Supreme Court Decision on the Children's InternetProtection Act have a look at the ALA Web site at www.ala.org. Click on the CIPA button on the right side of the screen. There's access here to the text of the decision as well as a wealth of other information.
- Sarah Long is director of the North Suburban Library System. Send e-mail to slong@@nsls.info.
Word count: 604
Copyright Paddock Publications Aug 10, 2003

