https://search-proquest-com.libproxy1.usc.edu/docview/351854468/9906BBA520AC4AC9PQ/54?accountid=14749
Internet not just for kids ; Survey finds 41 percent of all adult Internet users are baby boomers
Jesdanun, Anick. Oakland Tribune; Oakland, Calif. [Oakland, Calif]26 May 2003: 1.

NEW YORK -- Long before teenagers and college students began downloading free music and chatting away through instant messaging, the Internet was a world of baby boomers -- yesterday's youths.
These online veterans helped build the Internet and witnessed its dominance shift from academia to commerce. They've seen usage and manners change as businesses discovered the medium along with people less familiar with technology.
And they defy the common perceptions that the Internet's earliest adopters are teens and twentysomethings.
"The Internet didn't become a special playground of the young until the early to mid-'90s," said Lee Rainie, director of the Pew Internetand American Life Project.
Surveys of adult Americans conducted by Pew show that nearly 40 percent of the baby boomers who use the Internet are veterans of at least six years. By contrast, only 7 percent are "newbies" with a year or less of experience.
And while 41 percent of all adult Internet users are baby boomers, among veterans, a slightly greater percentage -- 44 percent -- are in that age group, 38-56.
Because boomers have been online since the'70s and the'80s, they can recall the days when the Internet was less commercialized and less point-and-click.
"They are witnesses to the fact that it once was different," said Janet Sternberg, 49, a Fordham University new media professor who has used e-mail since the
mid-'80s. "When I started on the Internet, there were no ads."
Veterans can help shape the Net's future, she said, by pointing out "some of the advantages of it being a different way."
She notes that online projects used to grow out of grassroots initiatives -- engineers at universities collaborating for the greater good of the Net. Nowadays, she says, projects get dictated by corporate priorities, whether it be Microsoft Corp. trying to gain market share or the music industry trying to combat piracy.
industry trying to combat piracy.
Karl Auerbach, 53, a networking engineer online since the early 1970s, said the veteran boomers are more aware of the limitations of technology -- and won't take scarce resources for granted.
"Anybody who's used the Net over (slow-speed links) understands how fast today's links are and how easily it can get clogged when mom sends a huge photograph of something," said Auerbach, who remains active online as a board member of the Net's key oversight body.
But today's e-mail programs, Auerbach said, are largely configured ahead of time to send e-mail using HTML coding, which creates larger files than plain text. Sternberg said people don't think twice now about clogging an e-mail discussion list with a large file attachment.
Sternberg also complains that today's Internet is more about entertainment and content promoted by big companies than about interactivity and communications.
While people today do use e-mail and instant messaging, she said, they are more likely to contact people they already know rather than use the Net to find strangers with common interests in jazz or cats.
Not that change is always for the worse.
When John Azzara, 46, of Deer Park, N.Y., first logged on in the early '90s, he was using the Internet to commiserate with others who have illnesses similar to his. Lately, though, doctors have joined those support groups, making them more informative and productive.
University of Washington graduate student Robert Tynes, 38, had few people to talk to when he and his stepbrother connected to the Internet around 1980.
Now that more people are online around the world, Tynes finds the Internet essential to his research: He was able to contact people in Sierra Leone when civil war made travel impractical.
Nonetheless, others say, there is something to be said for knowing what things were like.
Charles Ess, 51, a professor of interdisciplinary studies at Drury University, fears that the Internet is allowing researchers to "stay comparatively lazy" by giving them access to a variety of resources but allowing them to ignore the troves available in libraries.
Sally McMillan, 47, a professor of advertising at the University of Tennessee, recalls having to configure "stopbit" settings on modems and design Web pages without the point-and-click tools that now hide the underlying programming codes.
"It makes you have a better understanding of the different pieces and parts that underlie the process," she said. "Understanding what HTML code is and the basic principles makes you a better consumer, if you will, on Web-based communications."
Word count: 730
Copyright ANG Newspapers May 26, 2003

