https://search-proquest-com.libproxy1.usc.edu/docview/237019625/fulltext/29245D68FA4F4BE0PQ/7?accountid=14749

Internet abuse in the workplace: Issues and concerns for employers and employment counselors
Griffiths, MarkAuthor Information. Journal of Employment Counseling; Alexandria Vol. 40, Iss. 2,  (Jun 2003): 87-96.


Headnote
This article gives an overview of some of the main issues in the most serious form of Internet abuse (i.e., Internet addiction) before examining other types of workplace Internet abuse (cybersexual Internet abuse, online friendship/relationship abuse, Internet activity abuse, online information abuse, criminal Internet abuse, and miscellaneous Internet abuse) and why they occur. A few specific types of Internet abuse (online pornography use, sexually related Internet crime, online gambling) are also highlighted as issues for employers. The author concludes that Internet abuse should be taken seriously by all employers who use the Internet in their day-to-day business.
The Internet as a communication medium has become an increasing part of many people's day-to-day working lives. As with the introduction of other mass communication technologies, issues concerning use, abuse, and addiction have surfaced. For example, according to a recent report by the company SurfControl (Snoddy, 2000), office workers who spend 1 hour a day at work on various nonwork activities (e.g., trading stock shares, booking vacations, shopping online) could be costing businesses as much as $35 million a year. The survey found that 59% of Internet use at the office was not work related and that employees who traded in stock shares, played online games, shopped, and arranged vacations and travel cost companies the most. It is clear from this type of research that Internet abuse is a serious cause for concern-particularly to employers. However, before examining Internet abuse in more detail, in the next section, I briefly give an overview of some of the main issues in the most serious form of Internet abuse (i.e., Internet addiction), because Internet addiction in turn raises issues that are more general about Internet abuse.
INTERNET ADDICTION: A BRIEF OVERVIEW
Many previous writings about Internet abuse have concentrated on excessive use of the Internet (i.e., Internet addiction) and were based on work about other "behavioral addictions" (e.g., pathological gambling; Griffiths, 1995, 1996). It has been argued that behavioral addictions are no different from chemical addictions (e.g., alcoholism, heroin addiction) regarding the core components of addiction such as salience, tolerance, withdrawal, mood modification, conflict, and relapse. If it can be shown that a behavior like pathological gambling can be a bona fide addiction, then there is a precedent for the view that any behavior that can provide continuous rewards in the absence of a psychoactive substance (such as Internet usage) can be potentially addictive.
Research about Internet addiction suggests that it does, indeed, exist but that it affects only a very few users (Griffiths, 1998, 2000a). These are usually people who use Internet chat rooms or participate in fantasy role-playing games-activities that they would not engage in except on the Internet itself. To some extent, they are engaged in text-based virtual realities and take on other social personas and social identities as a way of making them feel good about themselves. In these cases, the Internet may provide the user an alternative reality and allow him or her to experience feelings of immersion and anonymity, feelings that may lead to an altered state of consciousness. This altered state of consciousness may itself be highly psychologically and/or physiologically rewarding. Case studies of individuals who use the Internet excessively may also provide better evidence of whether Internet addiction exists, because the data collected are much more detailed than data from surveys. Even if just one case study can be located, it indicates that Internet addiction actually does exist-even if one individual is unrepresentative of most Internet users.
There seem to be many people who use the Internet excessively but who are not addicted, as measured by accepted addiction criteria. Most people who conduct research in the field of Internet addiction have failed to use stringent criteria for measuring addiction, which has perpetuated the skepticism shown by many academics. The main problems with much of the research to date include the following:
* The sampling methods used have been questionable (e.g., an overreliance on self-selected samples).
* The measures used have no measure of severity.
* The measures used have no temporal dimension.
* The measures have a tendency to overestimate the prevalence of problems.
* The measures used take no account of the context in which the Internet is used.
* There is no survey work to date that conclusively demonstrates that Internet addiction exists.
It has been argued (Griffiths, 1999, 2000c) that many excessive users are not Internet addicts; they simply use the Internet excessively as a medium to fuel other addictions. In other words, gambling addicts or computer game addicts who engage in their chosen behavior online are not addicted to the Internet. The Internet is just the medium they use to engage in the behavior. Case study accounts (Griffiths, 2000a) have shown that the Internet can be used to counteract other deficiencies (e.g., relationships, lack of friends, physical appearance, disability, coping) in a person's life. Most excessive Internet users spend vast amounts of time online for social contact (mostly for chat room services). As these cases show, text-based relationship can obviously be rewarding for some people and is an area for future research.
Types of Workplace Internet Abuse
Internet abuse and Internet addiction are related, but they are not the same thing. Furthermore, the long-term effects of Internet abuse may have more far-reaching effects for the company for which the Internet abuser works than for the employee himself or herself. It may be that Internet abuse has no negative effects for the user other than a decrease in work productivity.
Young (1999) claimed Internet addiction was a broad term that covered a wide variety of behaviors and impulse control problems that have been classified by five specific subtypes (i.e., cybersexual addiction, cyber-relationship addiction, Net compulsions, information overload, and computer addiction). These subtypes can be adapted and refined to produce a typology of Internet abuse in the workplace. The types of Internet abuse in the workplace are cybersexual Internet abuse, online friendship/relationship abuse, Internet activity abuse, online information abuse, criminal Internet abuse, and miscellaneous Internet abuse.
Cybersexual Internet abuse. Cybersexual Internet abuse involves the abuse of adult Web sites for cybersex and cyberporn during work hours. Such online sexual services include the conventional (e.g., Internet versions of widely available pornographic magazines like Playboy), the not so conventional (Internet versions of hard-core pornographic magazines), and what can only be described as bizarre. There are also pornographic picture libraries (both commercial and free), videos and video clips, live strip shows, live sex shows, and voyeuristic Web cam sites.
Online friendship/relationship abuse. This type of Internet abuse involves conducting an online friendship or relationship during work hours. This category might also include the use of e-mailing friends or engaging in discussion groups, as well as maintenance of online emotional relationships. People may also abuse the Internet by using it to explore gender and identity roles by switching gender or creating other personas and forming online relationships or engaging in cybersex.
Internet activity abuse. Internet activity abuse involves using the Internet during work hours to do non-work-related activities (e.g., online gambling, online shopping, online travel booking, online computer gaming, online day trading of stocks). This type of activity may be one of the most common forms of Internet abuse in the workplace.
Online information abuse. Online information abuse involves the abuse of Internet search engines and databases. Typically, this type of abuse involves individuals who search for work-related information but who end up wasting hours of time with little relevant information gathered. This may be deliberate avoidance of work, but it may also be accidental. This activity may also involve people who seek general educational information, information for self-help/diagnosis (including online therapy), or scientific research for nonwork purposes.
Criminal Internet abuse. Criminal Internet abuse involves seeking out individuals who then become victims of sexually related Internet crime (e.g., online sexual harassment, "cyberstalking," pedophilic "grooming" of children). The fact that these types of Internet abuse involve criminal acts may have severe implications for employers.
Miscellaneous Internet abuse. Miscellaneous Internet abuse involves any activity that is not included in the previous categories, such as the digital manipulation of images on the Internet for entertainment or masturbatory purposes (e.g., creating celebrity fake photographs with the heads of famous people superimposed onto someone else's naked body).
Why Does Internet Abuse Occur?
There are many factors that make Internet abuse in the workplace seductive. Research in the area of computer-mediated communication has shown that virtual environments have the potential to provide short-term comfort, excitement, and/or distraction (Griffiths, 2000c). These reasons alone provide compelling explanations of why employees may engage in non-work-related Internet use. There are also other reasons (e.g., opportunity and access, affordability, anonymity, convenience, escape, disinhibition, social acceptability, and longer working hours) that are briefly examined in the following paragraphs.
Opportunity and access. Obvious precursors to potential Internet abuse include both opportunity and access to the Internet. The Internet is now commonplace and widespread, and it is almost integral to most workplace environments. Given that the prevalence of undesirable behaviors is strongly correlated with increasing time devoted to or access to the activity, it is not surprising that Internet abuse seems to be increasing. Research into other socially acceptable but potentially problematic behaviors (e.g., drinking alcohol, gambling) has demonstrated that increased accessibility leads to increased uptake (i.e., regular use) and that this eventually leads to an increase in problems, although the increase may not be proportional (e.g., a doubling of access opportunities may not lead to a doubling of problems).
Affordability. Given the wide accessibility of the Internet, it is becoming cheaper to use online services. Furthermore, for almost all employees, Internet access is free of charge; the only costs are time and the charges for some activities (e.g., online sexual services, online gambling).
Anonymity. The anonymity of the Internet allows users to privately engage in their behaviors of choice in the belief that the chance of being caught by their employer is minimal. This anonymity may also provide users with a greater sense of perceived control over the content, tone, and nature of their online experiences. The anonymity of the Internet often facilitates communication that is more honest and open with other users and can be an important factor in the development of online relationships that may begin in the workplace. Anonymity may also increase feelings of comfort because, unlike face-to-face interactions, there is no (or very limited) ability to look for, and thus detect, signs of insincerity, disapproval, or judgment in people's facial expressions.
Convenience. Interactive online applications, such as e-mail, chat rooms, newsgroups, or role-playing games, provide convenient ways to meet others without leaving one's work desk. Online abuse usually occurs in the familiar and comfortable environment of home or workplace, thus reducing the feeling of risk and allowing even more adventurous behaviors.
Escape. For some people, the primary reinforcement of particular kinds of Internet abuse (e.g., to engage in an online affair or cybersex) is the sexual gratification they experience online. In the case of behaviors like cybersex and online gambling, the experiences may be reinforced through a subjectively or objectively, or both, experienced "high." The pursuit of mood-modifying experiences is characteristic of addictions. The mood-modifying experience has the potential to provide an emotional or mental escape and further serves to reinforce the behavior. Abusive or excessive involvement in this escapist activity may lead to problems (e.g., online addictions). Online behaviors can provide a potent escape from the stresses and strains of real life. These activities fall on what Cooper, Putnam, Planchon, and Boies (1999) described as a continuum from life enhancing to pathological and addictive.
Disinhibition. Disinhibition is one of the Internet's key appeals because there is little doubt that the Internet makes people less inhibited (Joinson, 1998). Online users seem to open up more quickly and to reveal themselves emotionally much faster than in the off-line world. What might take months or years in an off-line relationship may only take days or weeks online. As some authors have pointed out (e.g., Cooper & Sportolari, 1997), the perception of trust, intimacy, and acceptance has the potential to encourage online users to use these relationships as a primary source of companionship and comfort.
Social acceptability. The social acceptability of online interaction is another factor to consider in this context. It is interesting how the perception of online activity has changed over the last 10 years (e.g., the "nerdish" image of the Internet is almost obsolete). Another sign of increased acceptance of the Internet may be that children are exposed to technology at an early age and, therefore, become accustomed to using computers as tools for socialization. For example, laying the foundations for a relationship online has become far more socially acceptable and will continue to be so. Most of these people are not societal misfits, as is often claimed-they are simply using the technology as another tool in their social armory.
Longer working hours. All over the world, people are working longer hours (Griffiths, 2002), and it is perhaps not surprising that many of life's activities are performed from the workplace Internet. The case of a single person who is looking for a relationship is an example. For this person, the Internet at work may be ideal. Dating via the desktop may be a sensible option for workaholic professionals. It is effectively a completely new electronic "singles bar" that, because of its text-based nature, breaks down people's prejudices about others' physical appearance. For others, Internet interaction removes the social isolation that all individuals sometimes feel. There are no boundaries of geography, class, or nationality. The Internet opens up a new sphere for the development of relationships.
INTERNET ABUSE: SPECIFIC ACTIVITIES THAT SHOULD CONCERN EMPLOYERS
In this section, I briefly examine three areas (online pornography use, sexually related Internet crime, online gambling) that employers should be aware of regarding Internet abuse by employees.
Online Pornography Use by Employees
The pornography industry was one of the first industries to take advantage of the Internet. It is estimated that the online pornography industry is worth $1 billion. In addition, the research company Datamonitor reported that sex accounts for 69% of spending on the Internet ("Blue Money," 1999). Academic researchers (e.g., Cooper, Scherer, Boies, & Gordon, 1999) have also claimed that "sex" is the most searched-for topic on the Internet and that as many as one third of all Internet users visit some type of sexual site. It is also claimed that much of this activity takes place in workplace settings and is, therefore, an issue of major concern to employers.
The problems that e-business and e-commerce ventures face today were first experienced by the pornography industry, which continually pushed the envelope of the technology of streaming because of the potential huge profits. Two particular features in current use (pay-per-click banner advertisements and real-time credit card processing) were both developed in the pornographic industry. These developments have had a significant impact on the accessibility that Internet users have. Furthermore, theoretical 24-hour constant access has the potential to stimulate Internet abuse, which may in some circumstances lead to addictive or compulsive activity. Again, these factors are just as salient to people in the workplace setting as to people with Internet access at home.
One of the main reasons that the pornography industry has such a vested interest in the Internet is that in the off-line world, purchasing most products is free of hassles, and it is anonymous. However, buying pornography in the off-line world may be embarrassing or stressful to the consumer, particularly if he or she must go to venues that are viewed as "unsavory." If consumers of pornography are given the chance to circumvent the process of buying pornography in person, they will. Furthermore, in the workplace, individuals may also be able to hide this part of their lives from their partner or family.
Sexually Related Internet Crime by Employees
The actual extent of sexually related Internet crime remains somewhat elusive; however, most commentators assert that it is on the increase (Griffiths, Rogers, & Sparrow, 1998). The reality is that advancements in computer technology, in general, and the increased availability of the Internet, in particular, have resulted in new innovations in, and an expansion of, the field of criminality (more specifically, in the area of sexually related Internet crime; Griffiths et al., 1998).
In the broadest possible sense, sexually related Internet crime can be divided into two categories: (a) displaying, downloading, or distributing illegal sexually related material and (b) using the Internet to sexually procure or intimidate an individual in some way (e.g., online sexual harassment, cyberstalking, pedophilic grooming). Both of these are possible in the workplace, although it is likely that downloading of pornography is the most common practice carried out there. The crackdown by police on Internet pornography has been argued by some to be futile because it could drive it underground (Griffiths et al., 1998). However, employers can introduce their own methods to inhibit this behavior in the workplace through the use of sanctions (such as fines or deductions from wages or dismissal from the job in the case of persistent offenders).
One area that has received little consideration is online harassment (which is not uncommon in workplace settings). Online harassment is not a new phenomenon because there have been reported cases throughout the 1990s. For example, in the United Kingdom, Maxine Morse gave up her L60,000-a-year job when male colleagues at the company with which she worked bombarded her e-mail address with images of bestiality and naked men taken from the Internet. She was awarded L22,000 in compensation (Griffiths, 2000b).
Cyberstalking is also an emerging issue about which employers should be aware. Very recently, the first prosecution of cyberstalking, or harassment by computer, occurred in Los Angeles, where Gary Dellapenta, a 50-year-old security guard, was arrested for his online activities (Griffiths, 2000b). The harassment began when Dellapenta was rebuffed by his 28-year-old victim, Randi Barber. Because of this rejection, Dellapenta became obsessed with Barber and placed advertisements on the Internet under the names playfulkitty4U and kinkygal, claiming that Barber was "into rape fantasy and gangbang fantasy." As a result of these postings, Barber began receiving obscene telephone calls and visits to her house by men making strange and lewd suggestions. Because the Internet is global, cyberstalking is thus a global problem; however, it was the legal system in California that took the lead in an effort to combat it. Many other cases of cyberstalking or persistent and unwanted e-mail messages, some of which have originated in the workplace, have also been reported.
Online Gambling by Employees
Gambling in the workplace is a little-researched field, despite its potential far-reaching consequences. A part of the problem stems from the fact that employers are reluctant to acknowledge that gambling is a workplace issue and the possible implications that may arise from such an acknowledgment. This section briefly examines the major issues regarding Internet gambling in the workplace.
Internet gambling is one of the newer opportunities for gambling in the workplace. There are now a huge number of Web sites that offer opportunities for gambling on the Internet by using a credit card. There are, currently, few legal restrictions to stop this form of gambling. An increasing number of organizations have unlimited Internet access for all employees, which allows activities like gambling to take place without arousing suspicion. Internet gambling is a somewhat solitary activity that can happen without the knowledge of either management or the employee's coworkers. Furthermore, Internet gambling that is problematic has few of the observable signs and symptoms that are commonly associated with other addictions (e.g., alcoholism, drug addiction). This makes it difficult for employers to identify problem gamblers. However, there are a number of behaviors and warning signs that might be indicative of a gambling problem. Many of these involve the misuse of time and money.
Problematic Internet gambling can be a hidden activity, and the growing availability of Internet gambling is making it easier to gamble from the workplace. It seems that for most people gambling on the Internet is not a serious problem, although even for social Internet gamblers who gamble during work hours, there are issues about wasting time and its impact on productivity. Gambling can affect both the organization and the individual's colleagues if the Internet gambling begins to be a problem. It is clear that managers need to become more aware of Internet gambling; once they have done so, they need to raise awareness about the issue among the workforce. Employers should seek to introduce a policy regarding gambling (including Internet gambling) at work. This policy should include a checklist that employees can use to assess themselves, but it. should also include a list of worrisome behaviors and warning signs.
ISSUES FOR EMPLOYERS, HUMAN RESOURCE PERSONNEL, AND EMPLOYMENT COUNSELORS
As has been discussed in this article, being able to spot someone who is an Internet addict or an Internet abuser can be difficult. However, there are some practical steps that can be taken to help minimize the potential problem.
* Take the issue of Internet abuse seriously: Internet abuse, in all of its varieties, has only recently begun being considered a potentially serious occupational issue. Managers, in conjunction with personnel departments and employment counselors, need to ensure that they are aware of the issues involved and the potential risks that Internet abuse can bring to both employees and the organization. They also need to be aware that for employees who deal with finances, the consequences for the company of some forms of Internet abuse (e.g., Internet gambling) can be very large.
* Raise awareness of Internet abuse issues at work: This can be done by circulating e-mails, leaflets, and posters. Some countries have national or local agencies (e.g., technology councils, health and safety organizations) that can supply useful educational literature (including posters). Telephone numbers for these organizations can usually be found in most telephone directories.
* Ask employees to be vigilant: Internet abuse at work can have serious repercussions not only for the individual but also for employees who befriend Internet abusers and for the organization itself. Fellow staff members need to know the basic signs and symptoms of Internet abuse. Employee behaviors such as continual use of the Internet for non-work-related purposes might be indicative of an Internet abuse problem.
* Give employees access to diagnostic checklists: Make sure that any literature or poster in the workplace includes a self-diagnostic checklist so that employees can check to see if they might have (or might be developing) an Internet problem.
* Monitor Internet use of staff members who may have problems: Staff members with an Internet-related problem are likely to spend large amounts of time engaged in non-work-related activities on the Internet. If an employer suspects that a employee may have a problem with Internet abuse, he or she should request that the company's information technology specialists look at the history of the employee's Internet surfing because the computer's hard disk will have information about everything that the employee has ever accessed.
* Check Internet bookmarks: In some places in the world, employers can legally look at employee's e-mails and check the content of the Internet sites that employees have accessed. One of the simplest checks is to look at an employee's list of bookmarked Web sites. If he or she is spending a great deal of time at work engaged in nonwork activities, many of the bookmarks will also be completely non-work-related (e.g., online dating agencies, gambling sites).
* Develop an "Internet abuse at work" policy: Many organizations already have policies for behaviors such as smoking or drinking alcohol. Employers should develop Internet abuse policies, coordinating these efforts between their departments of personnel services or human resources and local technology councils and/or health and safety officials.
* Give support to identified problem users: Most large organizations have counseling services and other forms of support for employees who find themselves in difficulties. In some (but not all) situations, problems associated with Internet use should be treated sympathetically (i.e., like other addictions that are considered more bona fide, such as alcoholism). Individuals who provide support services for employees must also be educated about the potential problems of Internet abuse in the workplace.
CONCLUSION
In this article, I have highlighted major issues regarding Internet abuse issues in the workplace. Internet abuse can be a hidden activity, and the growing availability of Internet facilities in the workplace is making it easier for abuse to occur in many different forms. It seems that for most people Internet abuse is not a serious problem, although for large companies, low levels of Internet abuse by individuals multiplied across the total workforce raise serious issues about work productivity. For employees whose Internet abuse starts to become more of a problem, it can affect many levels, including the employee, his or her work colleagues, and the organization.
Managers and the specialist staff members whom they employ (such as employment counselors) clearly need to become more aware of this issue; they then need to raise awareness of the issue among the members of the workforce. Knowledge about these issues can then be applied to organizations in the hope that they can develop an Internet abuse policy in the same way that many organizations have introduced policies regarding smoking and alcohol use. Furthermore, employers should inform employees about exactly which uses of the Internet are reasonable (e.g., the occasional e-mail to a friend) and which uses are unacceptable (e.g., online gambling, cybersex). Internet abuse has the potential to be a social issue, a health issue, and an occupational issue and should be taken seriously by all employers who use the Internet in their day-to-day business.
Sidebar
journal of employment counseling * June 2003 * Volume 40
References
REFERENCES
Blue money. (1999, May 27). The Guardian, p. 5. Retrieved May 27, 1999, from www.guardian.co.uk
Cooper, A., Putnam, D. E., Planchon, L. A., & Boies, S. C. (1999). Online sexual compulsivity: Getting tangled in the net. Sexual Addiction & Compulsivity: The Journal of Treatment and Prevention, 6, 79-104.
Cooper, A., Scherer, C., Boies, S. C., & Gordon, B. (1999). Sexuality on the Internet: From sexual exploration to pathological expression. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 30, 154-164.
Cooper, A., & Sportolari, L. (1997). Romance in Cyberspace: Understanding online attraction. Journal of Sex Education and Therapy, 22, 7-14.
Griffiths, M. D. (1995). Technological addictions. Clinical Psychology Forum, 76, 14-19.
Griffiths, M. D. (1996). Internet "addiction": An issue for clinical psychology? Clinical Psychology Forum, 97, 32-36.
Griffiths, M. D. (1998). Internet addiction: Does it really exist? In J. Gackenhach (Ed.), Psychology and the Internet: Intraj}ersonal, interpersonal and transpersonal applications (pp. 61-75). New York: Academic Press.
Griffiths, M. D. (1999). Internet addiction: Internet fuels other addictions. Student British Medical Journal, 7, 428-429.
Griffiths, M. D. (2000a). Does Internet and computer "addiction" exist? Some case study evidence. CyberPsychology and Behavior, 3, 211-218.
Griffiths, M. D. (2000b). Excessive Internet use: Implications for sexual behavior. CyberPsychology and Behavior, 3, 537-552.
Griffiths, M. D. (2000c). Internet addiction: Time to be taken seriously? Addiction Research, 8, 413-418.
Griffiths, M. D. (2002). Occupational health issues concerning Internet use in the workplace. Work and Stress, 16, 283-287.
Griffiths, M. D., Rogers, M. E., & Sparrow, P. (1998). Crime and IT (Part II): "Stalking the Net." Probation Journal, 45, 138-141.
Joinson, A. (1998). Causes and implications of disinhibited behavior on the Internet. In J. Gackenbach (Ed.), Psychology and the Internet: Intrapersonal, interpersonal, and transpersonal implications (pp. 43-60). New York: Academic Press.
Snoddy, J. (2000, October 18). Bill's up for office surfers. The Guardian, p. 28.
Young, K. (1999). Internet addiction: Evaluation and treatment. Student British Medical Journal, 7, 351-352.
AuthorAffiliation
Mark Griffiths, Department of Social Sciences, Nottingham Trent University. Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Mark Griffiths, Psychology Division, Department of Social Sciences, Nottingham Trent University, Burton Street, Nottingham, NG1 4BU, United Kingdom (e-mail: mark.griffiths@ntu.ac.uk).
Word count: 4671
Copyright American Counseling Association Jun 2003

