Although personal values have been widely used to examine consumer behavior in many product and service categories, little research has been devoted to the relationship between values and usage of the Internet. This article examines the association between consumers' personal values and their attitudes, preferences, and activities associated with using the Internet. With the use of survey data gathered from 506 Internet users, the relationship between selected Internet activities and specific personal values, and the association between two technological paradoxes (with relevance to the Internet) and specific personal values (as measured by the Kahle, 1983, LOV inventory) are explored. The Internet activities include (a) business-related uses of the Internet, (b) information and researchrelated uses of the Internet, (c) e-commerce and related uses of the Internet, and (d) fun and entertainment-related uses of the Internet. The results highlight the differences in behavior and feelings about the Internet based on personal values. Advertising and other forms of marketing communication can incorporate those personal values that appear to be linked to specific Internetusage or activities. - 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
For more than three decades, consumer researchers have been intrigued by the relationship between personal values and various dimensions of consumers' attitudes, intentions, and behavior (Hanna, 1980). This article uses the term personal values rather than values re.ecting the belief that values are being measured at the individual or "micro level, and that the presented findings capture the degree to which individuals relate to or are guided by particular values. The term personal values also serves to distinguish the values measured from the broader more societal or macro level values that depict a subculture, culture or society in terms of values; or even a higher-order level of values that describes a universal or human level of values (i.e., possibly agreed upon by almost all human beings).
The influence of personal values on consumer behavior has been examined in numerous contexts. Studies include research on personal values in consumption decisions for automobiles (Henry, 1976; Scott &Lamont, 1973; Vinson &Munson, 1976; Vinson, Scott, &Lamont, 1977), choice of leisure activities (Beatty, Kahle, Homer, &Misra, 1985; Jackson, 1973), effects and consequences of media usage (Ball-Rokeach, Rokeach, &Grube, 1984; Becker &Conner, 1981), natural food shopping (Homer &Kahle, 1988), and clothing attributes (Prakash, 1984).
Much of the research examining the influence of personal values in marketing and consumer behavior initially focused on the conceptual and measurement contributions of Rokeach (1968, 1973). In particular, Rokeach (1973) de.nes a personal value as "an enduring belief that a specific mode of conduct or end-state of existence is personally and socially preferable to alternative modes of conduct or end-states of existence" (p. 5). More recently, Kahle's (1983) nine-item list of values (LOV) has become popular as a viable option for exploring aspects of consumer behavior. The advantage of the LOV scale appears to be its focus on individuals in their daily lives, and that the LOV inventory is more easily administered and scored. Regardless of which particular personal values instrument is employed, the appeal of the personal values construct is based on the underlying assumption that values are instrumental as a "guide" to consumers' actions, attitudes, judgments, and responses to specific objects and situations.
The focus of this article is on the association between consumers' personal values and their attitudes, preferences, and activities associated with using the Internet. The following topics or issues will be explored: (a) the relationship between selected Internetactivities and specific personal values, and (b) the association between two technological paradoxes (with relevance to using the Internet) and specific personal values.
BACKGROUND
Over the past 10-15 years, there has been a gradual but steady shift in marketing and consumer behavior away from a concentration on the examination of continuous innovations-primarily in the form of new package goods (e.g., supermarket packaged-food items, household cleaning products, and over-the-counter pharmaceutical products), to an exploration of dynamically continuous or even discontinuous innovations -in the form of technologically advanced products or services (Robertson, 1967). This change in marketing opportunities has meant that marketing practitioners have increasingly concerned themselves with the taskof creating marketing strategies for products that challenge the usual ways of doing business. This is especially true in the world of marketing on the Internet. Supporting this paradigm shift in marketing, one need only contact the leading focus-group facilities or survey marketing research firms in almost any city and ask how their typical assignments have shifted during the past decade. They are likely to point out an increasing focus on more technologically complex and demanding assignments-telecommunications, medical technology, and Internet studies (frequently Web usability studies). A few might even admit that they long for the good old days when the typical study might be about a new smoother peanut butter or a potentially bettertasting beer. Such a response would likely re.ect the frustrations of finding owners or users of specific new technological products during the early stages of their diffusion. Further, the same general response might be forthcoming from advertising agency executives who would outline how their client mix has been shifting from the peanut butters to the technologically oriented firms selling telecommunication, medical, and Web-based products and applications.
Giving this shift from packaged goods to technological goods, it is surprising just how little attention has been given to exploring the underlying consumer behavior of a wide range of emerging technologies. This points to a need for research that explores the fundamental issues of how consumer behavior relates to the acceptance or diffusion of technologically new products by consumers.
Personal Values
It is Rokeach's (1968) point of view that the construct of personal values is more important than attitudes, because it is a determinant of attitudes and behavior. Additionally, because individuals possess many fewer personal values than attitudes, the personal-value concept is a more parsimonious way of describing and explaining the similarities and differences among individuals, groups, nations, or cultures. From the marketer's point of view, personal values can be envisioned as being more closely related to needs; hence, personal values expand the knowledge of consumers beyond demographic and even psychographic differences (Vinson et al., 1977).
Personal values have been explored in the marketing literature as both a basis for market segmentation and product positioning. There is a fairly widespread belief among marketers and advertising practitioners that an understanding of the dominant personal values of a target audience and how these personal values linkto product or service preferences is ultimately essential to the effective positioning of the product or service (Reynolds, 1985). Furthermore, because the meanings and motives underlying the consumption of many products and services may depend upon the personal values involved, effective marketing communications ought to recognize the relationship between personal values and motives (Kahle, 1985). Still further, research has suggested that advertising show target consumers how owning a particular brand is consistent with their personal values (e.g., Madrigal &Kahle, 1994; Sukhdial, Chakraborty, &Steger, 1995).
Although personal values are apparently important when it comes to the diffusion of a wide range of product and service innovations, it seems likely that this is especially true for new, unique, and potentially complex technological products and services. Therefore, it seems to be a worthwhile undertaking to explore the relationship between personal values and the adoption and/or use of the Internet(or for that matter any complex consumer technology).
Paradox and the Internet
One potential factor contributing to the complexity of understanding consumer behavior in relation to technological products and services is technology's inherent paradoxical nature. The paradox concept encompasses the notion that polar-opposite conditions can exist at the same time in the same thing (Mick&Fournier, 1998). Eight paradoxes surrounding technology products were identi.ed by Mickand Fournier (1998)-control/chaos, freedom/enslavement, new/obsolete, competence/ incompetence, ef.ciency/inef.ciency, ful.lls/creates needs, assimilation/ isolation, and engaging/disengaging. In a study of Internet users, Maignan and Lukas (1997) uncovered related paradoxes. They found that some users reported that the Internet was a way to af.liate with others, whereas other users reported it as a way to avoid direct social interactions. Thompson (1994) also identi.ed several bipolar themes related to technology products: (1) being isolated/being helped, (2) being accomplished/being frustrated, (3) knowing how to use technology to its full capabilities/not knowing how to use technology to its full capabilities, and (4) working with technology/playing with technology.
Recent research on Internet usage also points to a paradox regarding the social impact of the Internet. On the one hand, the Pew Internet and American Life Project (2000) reports that the Internet does not contribute to social isolation; heavy Internet users are as likely to report having a large social networkas light users. Conversely, Nie and Erbring (2000) argue that the Internet does contribute to social isolation. They report that the more time people spend using the Internet, the more they lose contact with their social environment.
This study concentrates on two paradoxes identi.ed by Mickand Fournier (1998), and also suggested in the other research cited above: (a) assimilation/isolation and (b) competence/incompetence. The notion that technology can facilitate togetherness or lead to social isolation is particularly relevant to the Internet given that it can be used to reach out to others (via e-mail and chat rooms) or to engage in a solitary activity without communicating with anyone (e.g., Web browsing). The paradox of competence/incompetence pertains to the Internet's ability to facilitate feelings of intelligence and effectiveness or to facilitate feelings of ignorance and ineptitude. These two paradoxes are likely to be related to diffusion and usage of the Internet.
METHOD
This section first describes the approach followed in securing the research sample, and then profiles the sample in terms of demographic factors and activities that they engage in on the Internet. The remainder of the section deals with the operational de.nitions of the variables.
Research Approach and Sample
The research is based on the responses of a sample of 506 Internet users who completed a self-administered questionnaire designed, in part, to capture various aspects of the Internet experience and personal values, as well some background demographic information. To secure participation, undergraduate and graduate students from two urban east coast universities were given an incentive (extra class credit) to recruit individuals who were not full-time students. The students were instructed to screen consumers so as to include only those who had experience using the Internet-that is, experience using e-mail, visiting chat rooms, sur.ng, or using other Internetapplications.
Table 1 presents a demographic profile of the respondents. The results indicate that 51% of the sample were male, 42% were married, and 74% were under 45 years of age. Overall, the sample was a fairly well educated and affluent group-with 88% having at least some college education and 50% earning $60,000 or more. Most respondents (67%) were employed full-time.
In terms of using the Internet, Table 2 profiles the percentage of respondents who engage in specific Internet activities. Not surprisingly, over 90% of the respondents report e-mail activity. The next five most common uses of the Internet are (a) reading the news, weather, or sports (59%); (b) learning or gathering information (50%); (c) making reservations or researching travel (49%); (d) sur.ng (44%); and work/business (43%).
Definition of Variables
The following subsections describe how personal values, specific uses of the Internet, and technological paradoxes (or feelings about the Internet) are measured.
The Measurement of Personal Values. Kahle's (1983) list of values (LOV) inventory was used to measure nine personal values. Although some of the LOV values are similar to the Rokeach Value Survey, LOV's proponents contend that the shortened list is both more relevant to individuals in their daily lives and easier to respond to (Kahle, 1983).
In using the LOV values, respondents were asked to rate how important each of the following nine LOV values were in their daily lives (1 - "very unimportant" to 9 - "very important"): (a) sense of belonging, (b) excitement, (c) warm relationships with others, (d) self-ful.llment, (e) being well respected, (f) fun and enjoyment in life, (g) security, (h) self-respect, and (i) a sense of accomplishment. Each of the individual values was split into a high and low group-those who scored at the median or above and those who scored below the median. Additionally, respondents were also asked to indicate the one personal value that was most important in their daily lives.
specific Internet Usage. A list of 19 Internet activities (see Table 2) was constructed from previous studies by Nie and Erbring (2000) and Hoffman, Kalsbeek, and Novak (1996). Respondents were asked: "When you use the Internet, what do you use it for?" and were then instructed to "checkas many boxes as apply."
Measuring the Technological Paradox Concept. Based on the literature previously cited, particularly Mickand Fournier (1998), nine items were posed to capture consumers' feelings about the Internet as they related to two paradoxes-assimilation/isolation and competence/ incompetence. Two items were proposed to encompass the concept of assimilation as it relates to the Internet:
1. The Internet can facilitate human togetherness and give individuals a sense of belonging.
2. The Internet is a good way to communicate and encourage human interactions.
Two items were proposed to capture isolation (the other side of the paradox):
1. The Internet can lead to human separation and cause individuals to withdraw from direct human interactions.
2. The Internet is dehumanizing.
Three items were proposed to capture the notion of competence:
1. The Internet enables me to do things I wouldn't be able to do otherwise.
2. The Internet makes me feel intelligent.
3. Using the Internet makes me more ef.cient.
Items proposed to capture the concept of incompetence were
1. The Internet makes me feel dumb.
2. Using the Internet makes me feel incompetent.
All items were measured on 9-point scales (1 - "strongly disagree" to 9 - "strongly agree").
FINDINGS
The results are organized into two sections. The first section deals with the relationship between selected Internet activities and specific personal values. The second section explores the association between the two technological paradoxes-assimilation/isolation and competence/ incompetence.
Internet Activities and Personal Values
One of the primary goals in this article is to explore the relationship between selected Internet activities and specific personal values. The discussion of Internet activities is organized into the following four categories: (a) business-related uses of the Internet, (b) information and research-related uses of the Internet, (c) e-commerce and related uses of the Internet, and (d) fun and entertainment-related uses of the Internet. The approach used in the analysis was to split the scores on each personal value into two groups-high scores (those at or above the median) and low scores (those below the median). Then created cross-tabulations of Internet related activities and specific personal values were created, and chi-square analysis was performed to examine any associations. Table 3 presents the findings of this analysis, and the following subsections discuss the findings.
Business-Related Uses of the Internet. The analysis indicates that of those consumers who use the Internet for "work/business," 79% scored high on "a sense of accomplishment" and another 73% scored high on "self-ful.llment." Still further, of those who use the Internet for "work/ business" 61% scored above the median on the personal value of "fun and enjoyment in life." On a second business-related Internet activity, it was found that of those Internet users who reported undertaking "job searches," 70% reported scoring high on "excitement."
Information and Research-Related Uses of the Internet. The results related to using the Internet for information gathering and research purposes reveal some particularly rich findings. Specifically, of those consumers who use the Internet to "lookup stockquotes," 82% scored high on the personal value "a sense of accomplishment" and another 74% scored high on "self-ful.llment." The findings indicate that consumers who use the Internet for "learning or gathering information" scored high on the following specific personal values: 79% scored high on "a sense of accomplishment," 78% scored high on "self-ful.llment," 68% scored high on "warm relationships with others," and 61% scored high on "self-respect."
When it came to "gathering product or retail store information," this analysis indicates that these Internet users tended to score high on the personal value of "self respect." Finally, there were no significant differences among the personal values for "reading the news, weather, or sports."
E-Commerce and Related Uses of the Internet. This research reveals that 83% of the respondents who "participate in online auctions, either as buyers or sellers," scored high on the personal value of "a sense of accomplishment." When it came to those consumers who were "using the Internet to make reservations or researching travel," 78% had a high score on the personal value "a sense of accomplishment," 77% had a high score on "self-ful.llment," 69% had a high score on "fun and enjoyment in life," 66% had a high score on "security," and 57% had a high score on "self-respect." Also, in the realm of e-commerce, 66% of those consumers who reported "buying goods and services online (using a credit card)" scored high on "a sense of accomplishment." Still further, 72% of those consumers who indicated that they "download software" scored high on the personal value "excitement." Finally, there were no significant differences among the personal values for the two remaining ecommerce related activities: "banking online" and "buying stocks or investing online."
Fun and Entertainment-Related Uses of the Internet. The analysis related to using the Internet for "fun and entertainment" reveals some interesting findings. In particular, of those consumers who use the Internet for "entertainment such as playing games," 76% scored high on "self-ful.llment," 75% scored high on "excitement," 71% scored high on "fun and enjoyment in life," 68% scored high on "security," and 60% scored high on "self-respect."
In the case of using the Internet for "real time audio or video," the research reveals that 74% scored high on "fun and enjoyment in life," and when it came to using the Internet for "researching hobbies" the results indicated that 74% score high on "self-ful.llment." The important Internet activities of "communication with others in chat rooms or message boards," is also related to a number of personal values. Specifically, 73% of those who reported visiting chat rooms or message boards scored high on the personal value of "being well-respected." Another 72% score high on "excitement," and 71% scored high on having " warm relationships with others." Finally, 72% of those Internet users who reported "sur.ng" scored high on the personal value of "fun and enjoyment in life," and another 71% scored high on "excitement."
No significant differences were found in terms of personal values and use of e-mail. This tends to support the position that e-mail usage has become so common or universal, that it does not by itself distinguish groups of Internet users.
Feelings about the Internet: Selective Paradox Dimensions
The nine items that were proposed based on the Mickand Fournier (1998) research were analyzed with the use of principal component analysis with varimax rotation. Although the items did not load exactly as expected on the two paradoxes that were considered ("assimilation/isolation" and "competence/incompetence") the analysis nevertheless revealed three underlying dimensions of "feelings about the Internet" (see Table 4 for factor loadings). The first dimension, comprised of five items (- - 0.77), was labeled "enabling," as it captured feelings about the Internet related to "competence," "ef.ciency," and "facilitation of communications." The second dimension, "incompetent," consisted of two items both related to "incompetence" (-- 0.76), and the third dimension, "isolation," was comprised of two items relating to "lackof interpersonal interaction" (-- 0.59).
The Internet users were asked to indicate the one personal value that was most important to them in their daily lives. One-way ANOVAs and post hoc tests were used to examine the relationship of respondents' most important value and these three dimensions of "feelings about the Internet" (see Table 5). The analysis in Table 5(a) showed that respondents who chose "self-ful.llment" (M - 31.3) as their one most important personal value indicated stronger agreement with the notion that the Internet was "enabling" than did those who chose "security" (M - 25), "self-respect" (M - 25.5), "fun and enjoyment in life" (M - 26), or "being well respected" (M - 27.4) (F(8,331) - 2.5, p -.01).
There were also several significant differences for the "incompetence" dimension based on the most important values chosen (F(8,337) - 2.0, p - .04). Respondents who chose "a sense of accomplishment" (M- 5.1) or "fun and enjoyment in life" (M - 5.6) more strongly disagreed that the Internet made them feel "incompetence" than did those who chose "security" (M - 7.5). Consumers who chose "a sense of accomplishment" as their most important value also more strongly disagreed with the "incompetence" dimension than did those who chose "respect" (M - 7.2) or "warm relationships with others" (M -6.9).
No significant differences were found for the last dimension-"isolation" (F(8,335) - .31, p - .96). This was likely due to the low reliability previously noted.
DISCUSSION
The purpose of this study is to extend the understanding of the relationship between how consumers use the Internet and their personal values. This was done by concentrating on two issues: (a) the relationship between selected Internet activities or usage and specific personal values, and (b) the association between two technological paradoxes (or "feelings about the Internet") and specific personal values.
In trying to understand how to segment the vast online audience, and how to communicate with them, especially what might be stressed when talking to Internet users, this research suggests that personal values are likely to be a rewarding avenue of exploration. This is more clearly seen by reorganizing Table 3 by personal values rather than by Internet activities. The reorganized data in Table 6 clearly identify which types of Internet activities are favored by those who score high or low on particular personal values.
For example, respondents who scored high (at or above the median) on "self-ful.llment" were more likely to use the Internet for learning or gathering information, making reservations or researching travel, work/business, looking up stock quotes, researching hobbies, and entertainment such as playing games than those who scored low (below the median) on "self-ful.llment."
There were several Internet activities that those scoring high on "a sense of accomplishment" were more likely to engage in than those scoring low on "a sense of accomplishment." These Internet activities included learning or gathering information, making reservations or researching travel, work/business, buying goods or services, looking up stockquotes, and participating in online auctions by buying or selling products.
As might be expected, compared to those who scored below the median, those who scored high on "fun and enjoyment in life" were more likely to engage in fun activities such as sur.ng, entertainment such as playing games, and real-time audio or video. Additionally, the Internet activity of making reservations or researching travel could be considered fun if it is for leisure rather than business travel. Not surprisingly, those who scored high on "fun and enjoyment in life" were less likely to use the Internet for work/business than those who scored low on this personal value.
Respondents who scored high on "excitement" were somewhat similar to those who scored high on "fun and enjoyment in life" insofar as they were more likely to use the Internet for sur.ng and entertainment, such as playing games, than those who scored low on these personal values. However, those who scored at or above the median on "excitement" also tended to use the Internet more for downloading software, communication with others such as in chat rooms or message boards, and for job searches than did those who scored below the median on "excitement."
In comparison to those who scored low on "self-respect," several Internet activities were favored by respondents who scored high on "selfrespect." Learning or gathering information, making reservations or researching travel, gathering product or retail store information, and entertainment such as playing games were all activities more likely to be done by those scoring high rather than low on "self-respect."
Examination of the personal value "warm relationships with others" revealed that those who scored high on this value were more likely to use the Internet for learning or gathering information and for communication with others such as in chat rooms or message boards.
Compared with those who scored low on "security," respondents who scored at or above the median on this value reported more usage of the Internet for making reservations or researching travel and for entertainment such as playing games.
Only one Internet activity-communication with others such as in chat rooms or message boards-was significantly different between high- and low-scoring respondents on "being well respected." There were no significant differences in usage of the Internet for those who scored high versus those who scored low on the personal value "sense of belonging."
It is interesting to note that many of the same Internet activities are in several categories of personal values. For example, "communication with others such as in chat rooms or message boards" is an activity done by those who score high on "warm relationships with others," "excitement," and "being well respected." This suggests that the same Internet activity might have a different meaning to individuals depending upon their personal value orientation. Further research will be needed to explore more fully the relationship between personal values and online activities.
This research also considered respondents' feelings about the Internet in terms of factors that we identi.ed as being related to technological paradoxes-"enabling" and "incompetent." Specifically, consumers who chose "self-ful.llment" as their most important value were more likely to agree with the positive aspects of Internet usage related to "enabling one to perform tasks more ef.ciently" and "communicate with others." It is likely that those who place a premium on "self-ful.llment" will tend to engage primarily in those activities that they find ful.lling. Thus, this segment had a more positive viewpoint of the Internet.
Overall, all personal value segments disagreed with the "incompetent" dimension, although some disagreed more strongly than did others. Those who chose "a sense of accomplishment" as their most important value disagreed the most strongly with this negative aspect of Internet usage. Similar to those who chose "self-ful.llment," for the "enabling" dimension, it is unlikely that those who value accomplishment would waste their time on an activity which would not lead to satisfaction of this value. Thus, marketers trying to encourage Internet usage might be wise to stress "self-ful.llment" in their communications.
It is anticipated that as the use of the Internet continues to diffuse throughout the population, more attention will be given to securing an understanding not just of the generic Internet user but also to finding ways to target and communicate effectively with more selective segments or audiences. The current study indicates some avenues for approaching such a taskwith personal values. Advertising and other forms of marketing communication can incorporate specific personal values that appear to be linked to specific Internet usage or activities.
Sidebar
Table 4. Feelings about the Internet: Selective Paradox Dimensions
Enabling (-- 0.77)
Using the internet makes me more efficient (0.77)
The internet makes me feel intelligent (0.76)
The internet enables me to do things I wouldn't be able to do otherwise (0.73)
The internet can facilitate human togetherness and give individuals a sense of belonging (0.71)
The internet is a good way to communicate and encourage human interactions (0.58)
Incompetent (-- 0.76)
Using the internet makes me feel incompetent (0.87)
The internet makes me feel dumb (0.82)
Isolation (-- 0.59)
The internet can lead to human separation and cause individuals to withdraw from direct human interactions (0.83)
The internet is dehumanizing (0.67)

