High-speed internet is one step closer // West Coast Internet chosen as LW provider: [1 Edition]
Abstract
At Tuesday's Golden Rain Foundation Board meeting, Broadband Services Chairman Mark Stein announced that West Coast Internet has been selected as the internet service provider for Leisure World.
An internet service provider, explains Leisure World's Broadband Services Director Russ Ridgeway, provides subscribers with a door to the internet, e-mail addresses, web posting and technical support.
PC Computer Workshop Supervisor Charles Nahas says West Coast has provided its subscribers with outstanding service, including a technician who weekly makes house calls to solve subscriber problems at no charge.
Full Text
The search for a Broadband internet service provider is finally over.
At Tuesday's Golden Rain Foundation Board meeting, Broadband Services Chairman Mark Stein announced that West Coast Internet has been selected as the internet service provider for Leisure World.
West Coast is no stranger to the community having already provided service to Leisure Worlders for more than a decade.
An internet service provider, explains Leisure World's Broadband Services Director Russ Ridgeway, provides subscribers with a door to the internet, e-mail addresses, web posting and technical support.
PC Computer Workshop Supervisor Charles Nahas says West Coast has provided its subscribers with outstanding service, including a technician who weekly makes house calls to solve subscriber problems at no charge.
The Capistrano Beach company, he says, also provides Leisure Worlders with special discounts and is already serving more than 2,000 subscribers in the community.
Ridgeway said various ISPs were looked at but West Coast met all criteria: cost, personal service, local, established business, good reputation and acceptance in the community.
Also a plus was that so many residents who currently subscribe to West Coast would be able to keep their e-mail addresses.
A spring time frame is still being targeted for the roll out of Leisure World's internet service.
Residents who have not signed up can still do so by going to the Leisure World website, lwlagunawoods.org, and follow the prompts to the internet sign up sheet.
In other business at Tuesday's meeting, the GRF Board approved a change of its annual meeting date to eliminate the three to four week lag time that currently exists between the election of new directors and the appointment of the mutual and GRF committee successors.
The new meeting date will now be Oct. 27. The old date was the Wednesday prior to the first Tuesday in November.
Credit: The News
Word count: 305
Copyright Orange County Register Feb 5, 2004

