https://search-proquest-com.libproxy2.usc.edu/docview/330114298/fulltext/6DCAA3300D3E4C8FPQ/39?accountid=14749

Abstract
TranslateAbstract
Howard Knopf, an Ottawa lawyer at Macera & Jarzyna, which is representing the CIPPIC, said the organization decided to become involved because it feared the privacy rights of Internet users could be violated. "The focus of our submission is that it is now or never for the defendants," said Mr. Knopf. "I cannot conceive of how a person could defend themselves against multi-billion dollar recording companies. It would be unimaginatively costly to get to trial in order for someone to establish their innocence."
Full Text
	•	TranslateFull text
	•	
Two online advocacy groups will put Canadian copyright and privacy laws to the test in a hearing later this month where the Canadian music industry will try to force Internet service providers to turn over customer information.
The Canadian Internet Policy and Public Interest Clinic and Electronic Frontier Canada have asked judge Konrad von Finckenstein to include them in a case involving the Canadian Recording Industry Association and Canadian ISPs such as Rogers Cable, Telus Corp., and Shaw Cable. The judge will allow the groups to make submissions on four points, including due process rights and Canadian copyright laws.
CRIA, which represents Canada's music industry, has gone to court in an attempt to gain access to the names of Internet users they allege have violated copyrights by uploading music files. CRIA claims the free transfer of music files has cost the industry about$400-million. At a hearing last month, Canadian Internet companies said they needed time to notify their customers and address privacy issues. A further hearing is scheduled for March 12.
Howard Knopf, an Ottawa lawyer at Macera & Jarzyna, which is representing the CIPPIC, said the organization decided to become involved because it feared the privacy rights of Internet users could be violated. "The focus of our submission is that it is now or never for the defendants," said Mr. Knopf. "I cannot conceive of how a person could defend themselves against multi-billion dollar recording companies. It would be unimaginatively costly to get to trial in order for someone to establish their innocence."
More than 500 lawsuits launched in the U.S. against file swappers over the past year typically resulted in settlements of between US$1,000 and US$2,000.
Philippa Lawson, executive director of CIPPIC, said her organization will raise issues about the legality of file sharing and whether Canadian laws are being violated.
Word count: 319
(Copyright National Post 2004)

