https://search-proquest-com.libproxy1.usc.edu/docview/212823916/AD356BAE0D8947B9PQ/3?accountid=14749
Internet Use by Colorectal Surgery Patients: A Surgeon's Tool for Education and Marketing

Abstract Translate Abstract The goal of this study is to understand the role of the Internet in the education and recruitment of patients within colorectal surgery practices. Surveys of Internet use were completed by 298 patients visiting five outpatient colorectal surgery clinics affiliated with the University of Southern California. Data collected included the patient's age, gender, level of education, zip code at home, type of clinic visited, and information on the respondent's Internet use. Overall, 20 per cent of the respondent patients visiting our clinics had used the Internet to research the medical condition that prompted their visit. Highest grade level completed (P < 0.001), age (P < 0.01), type of clinic (P < 0.001), and household income (P < 0.001) were all found to be associated with any prior use of the Internet whereas gender was not (P = 0.58). Among Internet users, only household income and frequent use of the Internet were associated with searching the Internet for medical information (P < 0.001). Ultimately, all of the Internet-using patients surveyed felt the medical information they found was "somewhat" or "very helpful." Understanding which patients "go online" to search for medical information is essential for surgeons who wish to use the Internet for marketing their practices and educating their patients. [PUBLICATION ABSTRACT]  Full text Translate Full textTurn on search term navigation Headnote The goal of this study is to understand the role of the Internet in the education and recruitment of patients within colorectal surgery practices. Surveys of Internet use were completed by 298 patients visiting five outpatient colorectal surgery clinics affiliated with the University of Southern California. Data collected included the patient's age, gender, level of education, zip code at home, type of clinic visited, and information on the respondent's Internet use. Overall, 20 per cent of the respondent patients visiting our clinics had used the Internet to research the medical condition that prompted their visit. Highest grade level completed (P < 0.001), age (P < 0.01), type of clinic (P < 0.001), and household income (P < 0.001) were all found to be associated with any prior use of the Internet whereas gender was not (P = 0.58). Among Internet users, only household income and frequent use of the Internet were associated with searching the Internet for medical information (P < 0.001). Ultimately, all of the Internet-using patients surveyed felt the medical information they found was "somewhat" or "very helpful." Understanding which patients "go online" to search for medical information is essential for surgeons who wish to use the Internet for marketing their practices and educating their patients.  ALTHOUGH ITS ORIGINS trace back to 1970, only after 1993 did the Internet become commercially available.1 Within the subsequent 4 years, approximately 22 per cent of Americans had access to the Internet.2 By September of 2001, 143 million Americans (or 53.9%) were using the Internet, increasing at a rate of 20 per cent a year. This growing popularity is due to the Internet's ability to simplify the transfer of, and access to, information. The resulting free exchange of information has influenced many aspects of society including finance, education, commerce, and health care.  Among persons using the Internet, 55 per cent use it to obtain health or medical information.3 These Internet users are seeking information about physical and mental illnesses and sensitive topics they do not wish to discuss in person. In addition, they are communicating with their doctors via e-mail and support groups in online chat rooms and message boards.3 As more patients have begun using the Internet, the medical community has become more mindful of the information available on the Internet. Though some have noted the generally poor quality of the information,4 8 others identified the danger in the available misinformation9 and the difficulty involved in finding the accurate information.10  There are no restrictions as to what medical information can be made available on the Internet. Unsubstantiated theories are as easily found as medical facts. In response, attempts have been made to evaluate and rate Web sites that provide medical information. On critical evaluation, these rating systems were found to be inadequate," and there has been a call for a system that would allow for precise labeling and screening of these sites.12 As a step toward this end, the American Medical Association has recently published guidelines on the production of medical sites on the Internet.13  Acknowledging the weaknesses in both the quality of many medical Web sites and the systems available to rate them, it is important to recognize who is using the Internet to research medical information. With improved characterization of these individuals, patient-oriented sites can be customized and practices can be marketed to the appropriate population. The goal of this study is to determine which patients prior to visiting the division of colorectal surgery used the Internet, to determine if they used the Internet for medical research, and to find out if they were satisfied with medical information on the Internet.  Methods  Questionnaires were provided to patients visiting the staff of the Colorectal Surgery Division at the Keck School of Medicine at the University of Southern California from September 23 through November 27, 2002 (Fig. 1). Both English and Spanish versions were provided. These anonymous surveys were completed by patients visiting four private clinics and a single public clinic. Data collected included the patient's age, gender, level of education, zip code at home, and type of clinic visited. In order to maintain patient confidentiality, the participant's race, nationality of origin, and language of choice were not collected. Median household income was determined using year 2000 U.S. Census data14 given the subject's residential zip code. Questions regarding Internet use included frequency, use for researching medical information, and the patient's opinion regarding the finding, understanding, and helpfulness of the information found during their searches.  View Image - Enlarge this image.  View Image - Enlarge this image. Statistical analysis was performed using the SPSS computing software (version 10.0 for Windows). Continuous data was evaluated using an independent Mest, and Pearson's [chi]^sup 2^ test was used for categorical data. Multivariate analysis was performed using a linear regression model. Statistical significance was set at P value < or =0.05. Prior to initiation of this study, all necessary approval was received from the University of Southern California Institutional Review Board.  Results  Overall, 298 questionnaires were completed by patients visiting colorectal surgery outpatient clinics at the University of Southern California (USC). Forty-five per cent of these patients had used the Internet prior to their first visit to USC. Of these patients, 45.1 per cent had researched the medical condition that prompted their visit to the clinic. Highest grade level completed (P < 0.001), age (P < 0.01), type of clinic visited (P < 0.001), and household income (P < 0.001) were all found to be associated with prior use of the Internet whereas gender was not (P - 0.58) (Table 1). Using a multivariate linear regression model, age, education level, type of clinic, and household income were all found to be significant predictors of Internet use. In addition, type of clinic, household income, and highest grade level completed were all found to be significantly correlated to each other (P < 0.01).  Most of our patients who use the Internet (73.3%) do so at least once a week, with 42 per cent using it at least once a day. In addition, 64.9 per cent of Internet users had a college degree or higher, compared to 14.5 per cent of persons who had not used the Internet. Those patients who searched for medical information on the Internet tended to be more frequent users (P < 0.001) and had higher median household incomes (P < 0.001) (Table 2). In addition, these patients tended to be male, had an average age of 47, and had an average household income of $55,700. In all, 94.9 per cent of patients who used the Internet to look up medical topics classified finding information "easy" or "reasonable" and 98.3 per cent found understanding the information "easy" or "reasonable." Significantly, all of the patients surveyed felt the medical information on the Internet was "somewhat" or "very helpful" (Table 3).  View Image -  TABLE 1. Population Characteristics  Enlarge this image. TABLE 1. Population Characteristics  Discussion  Through the free exchange of information, the Internet has touched almost every area of interest. It should come as no surprise that every month in the United States, 2 million more people start using the Internet.2 Now that most Americans have become comfortable using the Internet, a majority of Internet users go online in search of medical information.3 Therefore, physicians must be aware of who among their patients is using the Internet.  We found that 20 per cent of patients visiting colorectal surgery clinics use the Internet to search for medical information. This figure correlates with previous studies that report 19 per cent to 54 per cent of patients use the Internet for medical research. 15-18 In addition, just as we have found, Internet use among patients has been related to higher income,16, 17- 19 higher education level,17 and younger age.16,20,21 Internet use is also likely related to national origin and language of choice, but we did not collect this type of demographic information. Concerning use of the Internet specifically for health care research, our study found that this was significantly related to income level and higher frequency of Internet use, regardless of the type of clinic attended.  Stratifying our data by specific clinic location (public clinic, community-based clinic, and university-based clinic) reveals several trends (Table 4). First, there is a significant trend of increasing Internet use when comparing our public clinic (17%) to our community clinic (68%) and to our university-based clinic (82%). Respondents in our university practice are 20 per cent more likely to use the Internet than those in our community practice and almost 4 times more likely to do so than our county clinic respondents. It therefore comes as no surprise that there is a significantly increasing trend in both education level and mean household income when comparing our public patients to our community- and university-based patients. We also find that although our county patients are infrequent users of the Internet, they tend to be younger than our other patients. This is despite our finding that younger age is an independent predictor of Internet use.  View Image -  TABLF. 2. Characteristics of Patients That Use the Internet  Enlarge this image. TABLF. 2. Characteristics of Patients That Use the Internet   View Image -  TABLE 3. Patients&#39; Perception of Medical Information on the Internet  Enlarge this image. TABLE 3. Patients&#39; Perception of Medical Information on the Internet  Only 55 per cent of our patients categorized medical information on the Internet as "very helpful," which is consistent with previous reports.16- l8 This relatively disappointing rate may indicate that health care information currently available on the Internet is lacking with regard to its accuracy, presentation, and/or applicability. Whatever its cause, this mediocre appraisal of the Internet clearly reveals room for improvement. This study has taken a first step in solving this problem by determining the "target population" for disseminating information over the Internet.  Conclusions  Analyzing the characteristics of patients who do and do not use the Internet is invaluable in determining the type of patient who is likely to use this media to search for medical information. We found that these patients tend to be younger, male, wealthier, more educated, and frequent users of the Internet. Patients with these characteristics should be targeted by surgeons when using the Internet to provide educational information and market their practices. Though still in its infancy, use of the Internet in this way has been lauded as a tool to improve the patient-physician relationship and the quality of care provided.22,23 Recently instituted Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act regulations, however, may hamper electronic communications with patients and limit the potential of this medium. Nevertheless, as hospitals have clearly taken the lead in Internet marketing,24 debate remains to whether physicians should do the same.25  We have found that a significant proportion of patients in the division of colorectal surgery use the Internet for medical information gathering. These patients tend to be more frequent users of the Internet, and wealthier, younger, and more educated than those patients who do not use the Internet in this way. As more surgeons contemplate using the Internet to communicate with their patients, this information can be helpful when deciding what type of information to provide and to whom the information should be targeted. This opportunity will allow both more effective patient education and superior marketing of a surgical practice.  View Image -  TABLE 4. Patient Stratification by Clinic Location  Enlarge this image. TABLE 4. Patient Stratification by Clinic Location  References REFERENCES  1. Doyle DJ, Ruskin KJ, Engel TP. The Internet and medicine: past, present, and future. Yale J Biol Med 1996;69:429-37.  2. National Telecommunications and Information Administration and the Economics and Statistics Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce. A Nation Online: How Americans Are Expanding Their Use Of The Internet. Available at: http://www. ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/dn/Nation_Online.pdf. Accessed November 20, 2002.  3. Pew Internet and American Life Project. The online health care revolution: how the Web helps Americans take better care of themselves. Available at: http://www.pewinternet.org. Accessed November 20, 2002.  4. Culver JD, Oerr F, Frumkin H. Medical information on the Internet: A study of an electronic bulletin board. J Gen Intern Med 1997; 12:466-70.  5. Impicciatore P, Pandolfini C, casella N, et al. Reliability of health information for the public on the World Wide Web: Systematic survey of advice on managing fever in children at home. Br Med J 1997;314:1875-9.  6. Soot LC, Moneta GL, Edwards JM. Vascular surgery and the Internet: A poor source of patient-oriented information. J Vase Surg 1999;30:84-91.  7. Berland GK, Elliott MN, Morales LS, et al. Health information on the Internet: Accessibility, quality, and readability in English and Spanish. JAMA 2001;285:2612-21.  8. Gordon JB, Barot LR, Fahey AL, et al. The Internet as a source of information on breast augmentation. Plast Reconstr Surg 2001;107:171-76.  9. Biermann JS, Golladay GJ, Greenfield ML, et al. Evaluation of cancer information on the Internet. Cancer 1999;86:381-90.  10. Sacchetti P, Zvara P, Plante MK. The Internet and patient education-Resources and their reliability: Focus on a select urologie topic. Urology 1999;53:11 17-20.  1 1. Jadad AR, Gagliardi A. Rating health information on the Internet: Navigating to knowledge or to Babel? JAMA 1998;279: 611-4.  12. Eysenbach G, Diepgen TL. Towards quality management of medical information on the internet: Evaluation, labeling, and filtering of information. Br Med J 1998;317:1496-500.  13. Winker MA, Flanagin A, Chi-Lum B, et al. Guidelines for medical and health information sites on the internet: Principles governing AMA web sites. American Medical Association. JAMA 2000;283:1600-6.  14. United States Census Bureau. American Fact Finder. Available at: http://factfinder.census.gov.libproxy1.usc.edu/servlet/BasicFactsServlet. Accessed December 30, 2001.  15. Hellawell GO, Turner KJ, Le Monnier KJ, et al. Urology and the Internet: An evaluation of internet use by urology patients and of information available on urological topics. Br J Urol Int 2000;86:191-4.  16. Gupte CM, Hassan ANA, McDermott ID, et al. The Internet-Friend or foe? A questionnaire study of orthopaedic outpatients. Ann R Coll Surg England 2002;84:187-92.  17. Kalichman SC, Benotsch EG, Weinhardt LS, et al. Internet use among people living with HIV/AIDS: Association of health information, health behaviors, and health status. AIDS Educ Prev 2002;14:51-61.  18. Diaz JA, Griffith RA, Ng JJ, et al. Patients' use of the Internet for medical information. J Gen Int Med 2002; 17:180-5.  19. Mandl KD, Feit S, Pena BM, et al. Growth and determinants of access in patient e-mail and Internet use. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2000; 154:508-11.  20. Ross J, Chapman C, Murray C, et al. How much interest is the internet to patients? Sex Transm Infect 2000;76:393-4.  21. Robinson C, Flowers CW, Alperson BL, et al. Internet access and use among disadvantaged inner-city patients. JAMA 1999;281:988-9.  22. Johnson GL, Ramaprasad A. Patient-physician relationships in the information age. Marketing Health Services 2000; 20(1): 20-7.  23. Frank SR. Digital health care-The convergence of health care and the Internet. Journal of Ambulatory Care Management 2000;23:8-17.  24. Shepherd CD, Fell D. Hospital marketing and the Internet: Revisited. Marketing Health Services 1998;18:44-7.  25. Rothschild M. Internet marketing offers an excellent potential for increasing one's practice. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg2001;127:600-2.  AuthorAffiliation JEFFREY P. LAKE, M.D.,* ADRIAN ORTEGA, M.D.,[dagger] PETAR VUKASIN, M.D.,* ANDREAS M. KAISER, M.D.,* HOWARD S. KAUFMAN, M.D.,[dagger] ROBERT W. BEART, JR., M.D.*  From the Departments of * Colorectal Surgery and [dagger] Surgery, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California  AuthorAffiliation Address correspondence and reprint requests to Robert W. Beart, Jr. M.D., Professor and Chairman, Department of Colorectal Surgery, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, 1441 Eastlake Avenue, Suite 7418, Los Angeles, CA 90033.  Copyright The Southeastern Surgical Congress Jun 2004
