They're young, they're idealistic - and they don't care whose multi-billion dollar industry they destroy next.
A new generation of visionaries and entrepreneurs has come of age on the internet since the dotcom bust. Like the first dotcommers, many of them come with big, disruptive ideas and are not afraid to predict the overthrow of traditional industries that do not embrace the web.
Unlike the last lot, they have plenty of mistakes to learn from. They are the beneficiaries of a sea-change in consumer and business behaviour that has made the internet a part of everyday life for people everywhere. And they are more likely to come from somewhere other than the US, particularly when it comes to using the internet's fast-growing mobile incarnation.
For a taste of this new wave of internet ambition, listen to Bram Cohen, creator of BitTorrent, a peer-to-peer network that has speeded up the internet delivery of movies and other data-intensive files - to the annoyance of legal copyright holders. "The costs of distribution are plummeting rapidly," says Mr Cohen. "When it gets to zero, the content distribution businesses will disappear."
What role will there be then for the middlemen who stand between the creators of "content" and consumers? "There won't be a middleman," says Mr Cohen.
Such drastic predictions are not new: they were touted during the last dotcom boom. But this time it is different. Thanks to the rapid spread of broadband internet access, an audience exists for the big ideas that once seemed so much hot air.
Many of the apparently outrageous predictions made during the first dotcom boom "were all correct, just time-shifted," says Steve Jurvetson, a Silicon Valley venture capitalist.
The scale of new internet phenomena such as BitTorrent far surpasses what came before. Last year, an independent research firm estimated that files passing over BitTorrent accounted for a third of all the traffic on the internet: Mr Cohen says that this has probably now grown to a half.
Napster may have etched itself a place in internet history, but it looks like a cottage industry compared with what is happening now. As a result, the disruptive potential of such technologies - and the scale of the new businesses they could sustain - has been hugely magnified.
The main beneficiaries of the second coming of the internet have so far been the companies that emerged the strongest from thefirst dotcom boom - those such as eBay, Yahoo! and Amazon.com, or traditional companies that harnessed the early power of theinternet.
But Internet 2.0, as it has been dubbed, is also helping to launch a new generation of technocratic visionaries and entrepreneurs - people with fresh ideas about how to use the power of the web to change social behaviour and wreak havoc on existing industries.
This new flurry of ideas has a number of forms. In some cases, new business models have breathed life into old ideas. That has been the case, most spectacularly, with internet search. The multi- billion-dollar advertising business ushered in by Google and Yahoo! isnow being used to support many different forms of online media.
In other cases, the mass adoption of new technologies is starting to bring about significant changes in online behaviour, leaving entrepreneurs scrambling to find new business models and traditional businesses wondering what the impact will be on them.
The blogging phenomenon has been one of the most powerful examples. More than 8m people in the US already have their own weblogs, or online diaries, and the number internationally is growing fast.
There is little agreement on exactly what this phenomenon portends, let alone what its business impact will be. To some, blogging isan extension of the media business and will be governed by familiar media business models, albeit ones that are honed for a new form of micro-publishing.
"This is just the latest iteration of internet media," says Nick Denton, founder of Gawker Media, one of the first trying to build a publishing business around a network of blogs, and a former reporter for this newspaper.
"The economics of publishing on the web got so cheap that anyone can do it," he says. With low publishing costs and free distribution, weblogs can sustain themselves with far smaller audiences than traditional media, says Mr Denton.
That has enabled them to fill more specialised market niches, often ones that appeal more directly to reader's particular passions. Jalopnik, a Gawker blog for Americans who are fans of imported cars, can afford to take a more scathing stance on the often run-of-the mill vehicles turned out by Detroit than a mainstream motoring publication could.
To others, meanwhile, blogging represents something else entirely - a powerful new communication tool that will eventually change the way people relate to each other in the virtual world, and the way companies relate to their customers.
"We think that communicating to a small group of people will be more significant than communicating to a large group," says Mena Trott, who with husband Ben created Movable Type, one of the most widely used blogging tools.
According to this view, publishing your holiday snaps online for friends, or ruminating on family news, could prove a more powerful form of communication than e-mail and instant messaging, which have so far been the internet's most popular applications.
Six Apart, the company the Trotts formed, is now working on a version of its blogging software that can turn even the most technology averse user into a self-publisher on the internet.
How, though, to turn these myriad private conversations into a business? Blogging has the potential to create a new business model that could only exist on the internet, says Joi Ito, a Japanese financier and entrepreneur who is a Six Apart investor.
"Blogging will change the nature of advertising," he predicts, while also creating new forms of e-commerce - though how this new market will be organised, and who will get wealthy on the back of it, are still unclear.
An even more disruptive shift in the nature and economics of mass market communications could come from internet telephony. Though long predicted, the habit of making calls over the internet is only just becoming widespread, thanks to the mass adoption of broadband internet access.
Among the first to demonstrate the power of this idea have been Niklas Zennstrom and Janus Friis, who earlier created KaZaA, once of one of the most widely used peer-to-peer networks. More than 65m people have downloaded the software for Skype, their free internet telephone service.
"Skype and others are going to make it so that we will look back, 10 or 20 years in the future, and wonder why we ever paid for voice connectivity," says Mr Jurvetson, whose venture capital firm is one of Skype's backers. That upheaval could disrupt the businesses of the established giants of the telecoms industry, he adds.
The backers of Skype illustrate another fact about the new generation of internet entrepreneurs. They are often not to be found in Silicon Valley - and thanks to more advanced mobile and broadband communications networks, some other countries are already proving to be better breeding grounds for the new entrepreneurs than the US.
"A lot of the underlying technologies and technology companies are here, but the markets are elsewhere," says Reid Hoffman, a Silicon Valley entrepreneur. "That's unusual - usually the first market is here, then it's Europe and then it's Asia."
That has prompted even Silicon Valley's traditionally insular investment community to look elsewhere for the visionaries who will create the next big internet fortunes. "We're doing a lot of investing in China and Korea," says Mr Jurvetson.
But will this new generation fall victim to the same hubris that destroyed so many dotcom businesses before?
"This time the entrepreneurs are smarter," adds Mr Ito. "The advice they are getting is much better. The get-rich-quick mood is not as bad."
One thing, though, has not changed: the boundless ambition.

