Headnote
BACKGROUND: Despite the information available on the Internet and the increasing number of older adults who use the Internet, little is known about Internet use for health information by elders with arthritis. 
PURPOSE: The purposes of this study were (1) to examine the use of computers and the Internet by elders with arthritis and (2) to describe demographic and illness-related characteristics of elders who use the Internet to find health information. 
SAMPLE: Seventy-one elders with arthritis completed survey questionnaires. 
FINDINGS: Twenty-eight percent had a computer in their home, of whom 95% had Internet access. Thirty-nine percent sought arthritis information on the Internet. People with more education were more likely to use the Internet. However, age and functional disability resulting from arthritis were not associated with Internet use. 
IMPLICATIONS: Health professionals need to be aware of Internet resources and assist elders in finding appropriate Internet-based arthritis information. 
Arthritis is the most prevalent chronic illness and the leading cause of disability among the elderly in the United States (Arthritis Foundation, 1998; National Center for Health Statistics, 2003). One of every two persons over 65 years of age and nearly everyone by age 75 have some degree of arthritis in weight-bearing joints (Felson, 1998; Lawrence et al., 1989). Arthritis costs the U.S. economy $65 billion annually in lost wages and medical care (National Arthritis Data Work Group, 1997). Appropriate management, however, can greatly reduce the pain and disability resulting from arthritis, increase a person's sense of control, and improve quality of life (Fries, Lorig, & Holman, 2003; Hirano, Laurent, & Lorig, 1994; Lorig, Ritter, Laurent, & Fries, 2004; Lorig, et al., 2001; Lorig, Mazonson, & Holman, 1993). Although research suggests that educational interventions, such as the arthritis self-help course, are effective in reducing arthritis symptoms and improving a person's sense of control, these interventions are estimated to reach less than 1% of persons with arthritis (Arthritis Foundation, 1998). 
With recent advances in computer technology, the Internet has emerged as a new and convenient means of providing information and learning opportunities for people with arthritis. Despite the stereotypical view of older adults as resistant to new technologies, a growing number of national surveys report that the number of elderly who use computers has greatly increased since the early 1990s (Adler, 1996; Furlong, 1989; Hendrix, 2000; Lustbader, 1997; McNeely, 1991; Post, 1996; SeniorNet, 1998a, 1998b). Nearly 40% of individuals older than 50 years owned and used computers in 1997, compared with 29% in the early 1990s (Adler, 1996; Post 1996; SeniorNet, 1998b). Men were more likely than women to be the primary users of their computers, and married seniors were more likely to own a computer than their counterparts without spouses. Today, roughly 25% of online users are age 50 and older and 7% are over 65 (ClickZ Stats staff, 2001). 
According to a national survey of a random sample of 603 adults age 50 and older (SeniorNet, 1998b), older adults spend approximately 5 hours per week online. They used the Internet primarily to gain access to information and communicate with others via e-mail. The SeniorNet (1998a) survey in 2002 also found that e-mailing and viewing current news were the most frequent activities when they accessed the Internet. Moreover, 70% reported that they used the Internet to find health information in the sample of 2,084 self-selected Internet users aged 50 and older (SeniorNet, 1998a). Educational interventions on the Internet allow people to receive information at a convenient time without the constraints of geography (Gustafson, Gustafson, & Wackerbarth, 1997; Gustafson, Robinson, Ansley, Adler, & Brennan, 1999; Hornung et al., 2000; McConatha, McConatha, & Dermigny, 2003; Post, 1996). However, despite the information available on the Internet and the increasing number of older adults who use the Internet, little is known about Internet use for health information by elders with arthritis. Therefore, the purposes of this study are (1) to examine the use of computers and the Internet by elders with arthritis and (2) to describe demographic and illness-related characteristics of elders who use the Internet to find health information. 
Design and Methods 
Sample 
A convenience sample of 71 older persons was obtained from participants in programs of local chapters of the Arthritis Foundation, members of senior centers, and visitors to grocery stores in Virginia. To be included, a person had to be (1) age 60 or older, (2) diagnosed by a physician as having arthritis for more than 1 year, and (3) community-dwelling (i.e., noninstitutionalized). 
Measurement Instruments 
An Internet resource information form assessed computer and Internet use, including computer ownership, frequency of computer use during a week, Internet access, frequency of Internet use during a week, use of arthritis-related Web-based information, Internetuse for other information, and barriers to Internet use. 
A personal information form was used to collect information on demographic and illness-related factors, including age, ethnicity, financial status, educational level, marital status, duration of illness, and comorbidity. Additional variables, such as physical disability, pain, social support, daily stress, and depression, were collected as part of a larger study examining stress and coping in elders with arthritis. In this report, these variables are analyzed for associations between the selected demographic and illness-related variables with Internet use. 
Procedure 
Participant recruitment and data collection were conducted after approval from the institutional review board. If a potential participant met the inclusion criteria and agreed to participate in the study, he or she was asked to participate. Participants completed survey questionnaires and returned them in a sealed envelope to the research team either in person or by mail. They received $10 when they completed the questionnaires. The response rate was 62%. 
Statistical Analysis 
Univariate analysis was used to describe the sample. Logistic regression analysis employing SAS software was used to examine demographic and illness-related characteristics of elders who used computers to find health information on the Web in comparison with those who did not do so. Chi-square likelihood ratio, odds ratio, and p-value were determined. 
Results 
Characteristics of the sample are summarized in Table 1. The median age of participants was 71.63 years. Ninety-one percent reported having osteoarthritis. The majority were women (76.1%), white (94.4%), and members of a Protestant denomination (77.5%). Slightly more than half were married (52.1%). The median number of medical problems in addition to arthritis was 1.38. Participants had been diagnosed with arthritis for a median of 11.43 years. 
Regarding computer and Internet use by elders with arthritis, 28% of the respondents (n = 20) had a computer in their home, and 19 (95%) of these elders had access to the Internet. Eighty percent of computer owners used their computer more than once a week. Among the participants who had Internet access, 12 (63%) actually used the Internet. One half of computer owners used the computer almost daily. Among older adults with Internet access, nine (47%) used the Internet more than five times a week or daily. 
Sending and receiving e-mail was the major activity of older adults who accessed the Internet (92.3%). Thirtynine percent used their computer to research arthritis information, whereas, interestingly, 61% had not used the computer to find information related to their health needs or to arthritis. Thirty-three percent used the computer for entertainment. Another 33% accessed the Internet to find out finance-related information. 
Associations of Internet use with selected demographic and illness-related variables were analyzed by logistic regression. The only factor significantly related to Internet use was years of education (p < .009) (Table 2). People with more years of education were more likely to use the Internet. Interestingly, age and functional disability resulting from arthritis were not associated with Internet use. 
When participants were asked why they did not own a computer, 47% said that they did not need one. Others reported that they did not know how to use a computer (27%) or believed that computers were too expensive (21%). Still others commented about the difficulties in setting up a computer, reading the screen, and using the keyboard or mouse because of their arthritis. 
Discussion 
Almost one out of four elders with arthritis who responded to the survey owned a computer at home, almost all of whom had access to the Internet. Having a personal computer or Internet access, however, did not always lead to their use. Only slightly more than half of the elders in this study who had Internet access actually used the Internet. Lack of knowledge about using a computer or accessing the Internet may have been the reason. 
In this study, as in the SeniorNet survey of individuals aged 50 and older (SeniorNet, 1998a), older adults used the Internet primarily to communicate with others via e-mail. Almost all Internet users were sending and receiving e-mail messages when they accessed the Internet. Older adults also enjoyed computer games and obtained financial information through the Internet. Only a little more than one third of those accessing the Internet used their computer to find information related to their health needs or arthritis. It was not clear whether they were unaware of the availability of health information over the Internet, did not know how to access this information, or did not perceive this information as beneficial. A future study might attempt to learn why older adults do not use the Internet for obtaining health information. 
Only years of education was significantly related to Internet use among these elderly with arthritis. Although daily stress and social support were not associated with Internet use in this study, Wright (1998) found that the Internet was used to provide support, humor, or advice when individuals faced stressful situation. It is interesting that age, physical disability, and comorbidities were not associated with Internet use. One would expect that physical limitations, such as those affecting vision or hand or finger function resulting from arthritis, would be a better predictor of Internet use than age or a general illness factor. Because of the advances in adaptive technology, older adults may overcome their disabilities in using computers. For example, a trackball or a keyboard guard has been made available to overcome hand and finger impairment. Visual magnification screens and touch screens with voice recognition may assist elders with visual impairments. Thus, health professionals may help elders with disabilities to use computers with the available adaptive accessories. 
Unfamiliarity with computers was a major barrier to computer and Internet use. More than half of the respondents either did not believe that they needed a computer, did not know how to use one, or did not know how to set up one. The literature shows that older adults are more likely to purchase a computer if they are familiar with computers or have an adult child or friend who uses a computer (Adler, 1996; Post, 1996; SeniorNet, 1998). The perceived usefulness of computers motivates older adults to purchase and learn about computers. Motivating factors included the ability to exchange correspondence, the availability of special software designed for older adults, and the availability of computer classes for the elderly (Echt & Morrell, 1998; Kautzmann, 1990; Kubeck, MillerAlrecht, & Murphy, 1999; McNeely, 1991; White, et al., 2002). This study suggests that older adults would be more interested in using a computer if features were readily available to aid them in reading the screen, hearing audio texts, and using the keyboard/mouse. Other components that might improve the usability of Internet health information include visual and audio text in English and Spanish; interactive components, such as e-mail and discussion forums; news about the latest research; Web links to sites directly related to a person's particular needs; and e-mail or real-time counseling about health and arthritis healthcare from healthcare professionals. 
Implications 
The Internet is a powerful medium for disseminating health information about arthritis to older adults. Health professionals should be aware of Internet resources that provide valuable information and support, inquire about Internet access availability, and, for those with access, assist elders in finding Internet-based arthritis management information. Older adult users' literacy level and physical impairments should also be considered. Computer learning classes for older adults can help them be successful in online searches for health information and enhance positive experiences with the computer. 
Well-developed user-friendly Internet health resources that directly address arthritic older adults' needs and concerns can empower them through knowledge, skills, and support. However, the quality of information and ease of use of Internet health resources varies widely. It is considerably time consuming to seek information among the vast number of Web resources related to arthritis because of inaccessibility, irrelevance, nonEnglish languages, or duplication. Health professionals need to examine content, readability, navigation features, credibility, organization, and graphic appearance before they refer patients to an Internet health resource. Several Web sites that have been considered as useful with high credibility were listed in Table 3. To assist patients with arthritis, especially those who are newly diagnosed, it is imperative that nurses remain aware of Web sites that provide current accurate information and are user friendly. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was funded by an A. D. Williams Research Grant at the Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA. The first author was supported by the Hartford Center of Geriatric Nursing Excellence, College of Nursing, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, during preparation of the manuscript. The authors thank Ms. Elizabeth Tornquist and Mr. Williams Gabello for their editorial assistance. 
Sidebar
Only years of education was significantly related to Internet use among these elderly with arthritis. 
References
REFERENCES 
Adler, R. P. (1996). Older adults and computers: Report of a national survey. Retrieved November 17, 2004, from http:// www.seniornet.org. 
Arthritis Foundation, the Association of State and Territorial Health Officials, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (1998). National arthritis action plan: A public health strategy. Atlanta, GA: Arthritis Foundation. 
ClickZ Stats staff. (2001). U.S. online population holds steady. Retrieved November 17, 2004, from http://www. clickz. com/stats/. 
Echt, K. V., & Morrell, R. W. (1998). Effects of age and training formats on basic computer skill acquisition in older adults. Educational Gerontology, 24, 3-25. 
Felson, D. T. (1998). Epidemiology of osteoarthritis. In K. D. Brandt, M. Doherty, & L. S. Kohmander (Eds.), Osteoarthritis (pp. 13022). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Fries, J. F., Long, K., & Holman, H. R. (2003). Patient selfmanagement in arthritis? Yes! Journal of Rheumatology, 30(6), 1130-1132. 
Furlong, M. (1989). An electronic community for older adults: The SeniorNet network. Journal of Communication, 39, 145-153. 
Gustafson, D. H., Gustafson, R. C., & Wackerbath, S. (1997). CHESS: Health information and decision support for patients and families. Generations: The Journal of the Western Gerontological Society, 21, 56-58. 
Gustafson, D. H., Robinson, T. N., Ansley, D., Adler, L., & Brennan, P. F. (1999). Consumers and evaluation of interactive health communication applications. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 1, 23-29. 
Hendrix, C. C. (2000). Computer use among elderly people. Computers in Nursing, 18, 1-13. 
Hirano, P., Laurent, D., & Long, K. (1994). Arthritis patient education studies, 1987-1991: A review of the literature. Patient Education and Counseling, 24, 9-54. 
Hornung, R. L., Lennon, P. Ã., Garrett, J. M., DeVellis, R. E, Weinberg, P. D., & Strecher, V. J. (2000). Interactive computer technology for skin cancer prevention targeting children. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 18, 69-76. 
Kautzmann, L. N. (1990). Introducing computers to the elderly. Physical and Occupational Therapy in Geriatrics, 9, 27-36. 
Kubeck, J., Miller-Alrecht, S., & Murphy, M. (1999). Finding information on the World Wide Web: Exploring older adults' exploration. Educational Gerontology, 25, 167-183. 
Lawrence, R., Hochberg, M., Kelsey, J., McDuffie, R, Medsger, T., Felts, W., et al. (1989). Estimates of the prevalence of selected arthritic and musculoskeletal disease in the United States. The Journal of Rheumatology, 16, 427-441. 
Lorig, K., Mazonson, P., & Holman, H. R. (1993). Evidence suggesting that health education for self-management in patients with chronic arthritis has sustained health benefits while reducing health care costs. Arthritis and Rheumatism, 36, 439-446. 
Lorig, K., Ritter, P. L., Laurent, D. D., & Fries, J. E (2004). Long-term randomized controlled trials of tailored-print and small-group arthritis self-management interventions. Medical Care, 42, 346-354. 
Lorig, K. R., Ritter, P., Stewart, A. L., Sobel, D. S., Brown, B. W. Jr., Bandura, A., et al. (2001). Chronic disease selfmanagement program: 2-year health status and health care utilization outcomes. Medical Care, 39, 12171223. 
Lustbader, W. (1997). On bringing older people into the computer age. Generations: The Journal of the Western Gerontological Society, 21, 30-31. 
McConatha, D., McConatha, J. T., & Dermigny, R. (2003). The use of interactive computer services to enhance the quality of life for long-term care residents. The Gerontologist, 34, 553-556. 
McNeely, E. (1991). Computer-assisted instruction and the older-adult learner. Educational Gerontology, 17, 229- 237. 
National Arthritis Data Work Group. (1997). Osteoarthritis fact sheet. Arthritis Foundation. Retrieved November 17, 2004, from http://www.arthritis.org.libproxy1.usc.edu/facts/fs/osteoarthritis. Shtml. 
National Center for Health Statistics. (2003). Health, United States, 2003 with Chartbook on Trends in the Health of Americans. Hyattsville, MD: Author. 
Post, J. A. (1996). Internet resources on aging: Seniors on the net. The Gerontologist, 36, 565-569. 
SeniorNet. (1998a). SeniorNet Survey on Internet Use, November 2002. Retrieved from http://www.seniornet.org/ php/default.php. 
SeniorNet. (1998b). Research on senior's computer and Internet usage: Report of a national survey. Retrieved from http://www.seniornet.org/php/default.php. 
Weiss, R. (1969). The provision of social relationships. In Z. Rubin (Ed.) Doing unto others: Joining, molding, conforming, helping, loving (pp. 17-26). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
White, H., McConnell, E., Clipp, E., Branch, L. G., Sloane, R., Pieper, C., et al. (2002). A randomized, controlled trial of the psychosocial impact of providing Internet training and access to older adults. Aging & Mental Health, 6, 213-221. 
Wright, K. (1998). Social support on the Internet [World Wide Web article]. SeniorNet . Retrieved November 17, 2004, from http://www.seniornet.org. 
AuthorAffiliation
* Sunghee H. Tak, PhD, MPH, RN, College of Nursing, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock. 
* Song Hee Hong, PhD, College of Pharmacy, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock. 
Word count: 2954
Copyright Lippincott Williams & Wilkins Mar/Apr 2005

