Internet Inequalities: Financial Aid, the Internet, and Low-Income Students

Abstract
Translate Abstract
This article focuses on the Web-based resources available to low-income students as they build their perceptions, make their decisions, and engage in financial aid activities. Data are gathered from the results of focus groups and case studies. Findings suggest that low-income students do have access to computers but lack the knowledge and support needed to navigate the financial aid resources available online. [PUBLICATION ABSTRACT] 
Full text
	•	Translate Full text
	•	
Headnote
This article focuses on the Web-based resources available to low-income students as they build their perceptions, make their decisions, and engage in financial aid activities. Data are gathered from the results of focus groups and case studies. Findings suggest that low-income students do have access to computers but lack the knowledge and support needed to navigate the financial aid resources available online. 
Keywords: financial aid; Internet; low-income students 
As this issue shows, access to financial aid is receiving more attention in research and policy arenas. At a time when the reauthorization of the Higher Education Act is under discussion, the relationships between financial aid and college going for low-income students are considered from a variety of perspectives (Trotter, 2005). A better understanding of the role of peers and peer counseling, the impact of perceptions about financial aid, and student engagement are all discussed within this issue. This particular piece focuses on the Web-based resources available to students as they build their perceptions, make their decisions, and engage in financial aid activities. Increasingly, the Internet is used as part of the financial aid and college application process. The value of online and, thus, expedited financial aid processes results in more time to make choices about college attendance and adjust to the transition from high school to college. For example, students who complete their Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) online receive faster application review and notification than those who choose to submit their forms on paper. As such, this article considers the day-to-day use of the Internet as part of the financial aid process. 
The goals of this article are threefold. An initial goal is to consider the impact of the "digital divide" in seeking financial aid for low-income students. The second goal is to provide a portrait of what computer and Internet access looks like in a low-income urban high school context. The final goal of the article is to suggest directions for policy and future research with attention to the needs of low-income students. Data sources include focus groups with a subset of students from two school sites and a comparative case study of two students who applied for financial aid using paper and online processes. A cultural ecological framework is used to analyze data, setting the stage for suggestions for future research and implications for practice. 
The Internet, Financial Aid, and College Access 
To understand more about the role of the Internet and access to financial aid, four types of Web-based financial aid sites are considered. The sites include the FAFSA Web site, the Cal Grant (California State aid program) Web site, scholarship search engines (such as Fastweb.com), and the financial aid interfaces at individual colleges and universities that offer Web-based services. To date, the literature on Internet use and access to financial aid is sparse. Policy makers, researchers, and practitioners are eager to turn to the Internet as a resource for financial aid processes, and yet we have very little understanding of how students use the Internet to access financial aid. In this work, research on the Internet and college and financial aid information is organized as follows: (a) access to computers in public high schools, (b) increasing use of the Internet by colleges and universities, and (c) governmental shifts to online-only financial aid processing. 
Using the Internet at School 
Initial discussion about the use of Internet technology to access college-going information focuses on the role of the school. Although there has been an increase in low-income participation in Internet access beyond the traditional school walls (National TRIO Clearinghouse, 2001), it is apparent that access to Web-linked computers is decreasing in the schools where most low-income students are populated (Fox, 2005). Finally, more computers in low-income schools do not guarantee student access (Gladieux & Swail, 1999b), especially in cases in which students are not allowed to use the computers or students and school staff are not trained to negotiate financial aid processes (Jackson, 2003). 
Furthermore, a recent report on the use of technology in schools notes the shift of attention from supporting student access to investing in technology that allows school administrators to keep up with the increasing demands of reporting student achievement (Trotter, 2005). The effects of this change mean that fewer Internet-linked computers are available to students for college and financial aid searches. For example, in California, a state with high numbers of low-income students, there is less than 1 Internet-linked computer for every 6 students, and guidance counselors are not required to have Internet training (Borja, 2005). Counselors are often not able to assist students navigating the Web. 
The Internet and College Admission 
In the 1990s, the use of Internet technologies in college admission and financial aid was heralded as the wave of the future (Frazier, 2003; Gladieux & Swail 1999a, 1999b; Hartman 1998; Shelley, 1989). Colleges and universities exhibited an increasing reliance on the Internet for admission, financial aid, housing, and registration processes. Admissions and financial aid personnel were concerned about their ability to be effective and attractive to the online student viewer (Hartman, 1998; Hossler, 1998). The advantages of real-time information and expedited admission, financial aid, and housing information increased the quality of service available to Web-registered student users. Parents and students could "virtually visit" colleges from the convenience of their own home (Hartman, 1998). At the same time, advocates for low-income students and students of color warned of the potential for Internet resources to become "engines of inequality" if they were not made available to all students (Gladieux & Swail, 1999a). 
College admission and financial aid offices have moved to paperless application processing, hoping to streamline their own work and create cost savings for their institutions. At the level of the student, it has been suggested that online processing has created a number of important knowledge transformations. Frazier (2003) posited that students can use Web sites to move from "bewilderment" to "easy access [to] information" shaped by the ability to move from "mail time" to "real-time" and "8:00 to 5:00" to "24 hours a day" (p. 34). Through these shifts, it is expected that students will be able to connect with financial aid and admission offices in a much more proactive way. Federal and state government processes are also engaged in transitioning toward simplification methods that require Internet registrations and application processes (Frazier, 2003). 
The Internet and Government-Sponsored Financial Aid 
Although financial aid systems have historically been the slowest area of higher education to computerize (Shelley, 1989), online processing has been heralded as a "cure-all" to the many problems of the financial aid application process. Proponents of online financial aid processing see the Web as a way to decrease mistakes, expedite the review and processing of Web-based forms, and save on filing costs for government and postsecondary institutions, who can in turn use these savings to increase aid offerings (Jackson, 2003). Although these goals are noble, they are also lofty. Past research suggests that low-income students' transition to online processing has been slow, cumbersome, and serves as a possible deterrent for low-income students with little access to Internet technologies (Gladieux & Swail, 1999b; Jackson, 2003; Resta, 1994; Wright, Stewart, & Burrell, 1999). The impact of these three service providers on financial aid and college access can be viewed through a cultural ecological framework. As such, the next section of this article describes a cultural ecological approach to investigating the use of the Internet for financial aid. 
A Cultural Ecological Framework 
The data presented in the following sections are driven by the notion that cultural ecology plays a role in the acquisition of financial aid knowledge. That is, there is a set of cultural influences, resources, and expectations that affect students' ability and drive to acquire financial aid. Past studies of financial aid center on rational choice, college choice, and even social capital (Cabrera, Nora, & Castañeda, 1993; Choi, 2001; Flint, 1992; Grodsky & Jones, 2004; Hossler, Schmidt, & Vesper, 1998; Levine & Nidiffer, 1996), with little attention to contextual factors. Although rational thought and college knowledge influence decisions, place, time, and context shape individual decision making and action as well (Bronfenbrenner, 1979). The cultural ecological model used here is based on the understanding that environmental impacts matter (Tierney & Venegas, 2005). A cultural ecological model emphasizes the impact of family or home environments, peer environments, school environments, and community or out-of-school environments. In the specific case of online financial aid processing, it is possible to see how these environments might come together to influence access to resources and information. 
Research Method 
The data presented here are part of a 3-year study of low-income urban high school students and their perceptions about seeking financial aid for college. A review of 90 initial interviews revealed that the Internet was often noted as a part of the financial aid process. To understand more about the use of the Internet and access to financial aid, six focus groups were conducted at two high schools participating in the larger study. Students who participated in the focus groups identified as 12th-grade students who were college bound to either 2-year or 4-year institutions. Two contrasting case studies of two low-income urban high school students, selected from additional individual interviews, show how the differences in access to financial aid are experienced. Although the focus groups provide a broader perspective of student experiences, the case studies paint a picture of how the financial aid application process can differ from student to student and from one application process to another. 
Focus Group Findings 
The levels of computer activity by participants in focus groups suggest that the digital divide is not as wide as feared in this urban setting; students have access to the Internet in a number of locations. However, this basic finding does not address how or why students use the Internet. Additional questions are merited, such as Which financial aid and college Web sites do students access when they are online? What types of information do they seek? and What do they learn while they are there? To find answers to questions like these, four focus groups with students at two high schools were conducted to get a deeper sense of how students use the Internet for college and financial aid information. To discuss these findings, the data in this section are organized by type of Web site visited-beginning with state and federal Web sites, then moving on to Web sites designed for postsecondary institutions, and concluding with financial aid-resource Web sites such as Fastweb.com or Collegeboard.com. The data are organized this way because this is typically how students talked about the different Web sites they used. 
Visiting State and Federal Web Sites 
All of the students who participated in focus groups could visit state and federal Web sites to learn more about financial aid. Although many students had visited federal Web sites, few students had visited Web sites sponsored by state resources. The two or three students who had visited state Web sites spent very little time reviewing their pages: "I went to the California site, but I couldn't find the Cal Grant stuff or anything so I just said forget it." When asked why students might find state-level Web sites useful, they were unsure: "For me, I'm not really sure what information I can find there. Like does it have information about Cal Grant probably and maybe scholarships? I don't know." A few students were surprised when they heard that there was a state Web site: "I'm sorry but I didn't know that there was a Cal Grant or California website. I thought that Cal Grant forms and information were just for college counselors." Once this brave student made this public admission, more students confessed their lack of knowledge: "I didn't know that you could go there for information either." 
Students had many more experiences with using the federal Web sites-especially the Web site available for completing the FAFSA. Many students could recite the Web site address from memory. Students used the www.fafsa.ed.gov Web site to complete the FAFSA online, learn more about the federal financial aid process, and check on the status of their federal aid application. Usually, visiting the Web site to learn about and complete the FAFSA was a multiple-step process that took place during a period of from 5 to 7 months. One student described her process as follows: 
Well, first, I had to go on-line to get a PIN [personal identification number] for myself. Then later I went back to fill out my FAFSA. When I was at the end of the form, I saw that I had to get a PIN for my parents. So a few days later, I went got a PIN for my parents and then I went back to complete the form. That same day I was able to get my FAFSA done. Then I had to go back again and look at my SAR [Student Aid Report]. 
The detailed process this student recounts was similar to the process that many other students described when they recounted their stories of visiting the federal financial aid Web site. 
Engaging in these activities represented a minimum of three visits to the site. Initially, students needed to be able to create a PIN for themselves and a family member: "I knew that I needed a PIN for me but I didn't know about my parents. So I had to get a PIN for my parents." As part of the PIN application process, students and parents must supply specific personal information: 
They want a social security number for both you and your parent and you are supposed to have an email for you and your parents. My mom didn't have an email so I had to create one for her. It took like three days to get it all done. 
This student was able to get a PIN easily, but this was not the case for others: "When I told my dad that I needed his social security number, he was like 'Why?' because he doesn't like to give it out. After I explained, then he gave it to me, but just barely." Because of the level of personal information that is required for the FAFSA process, students relayed their parents' and their own apprehension about listing private information such as tax returns, social security numbers, and family living situation online: 
My mom told me that I have to do all of my FAFSA at home when she found out about the income information and stuff. She told me that I shouldn't be taking that kind of information outside of the house. 
In this case, parental concerns influenced a student to complete his online financial aid transactions from the safety of home. 
Completing the FAFSA as an online process proved to be challenging, even for students who prepared for the process: 
At the [financial aid] workshop, they told us to do the FAFSA on paper and then transfer your answers onto the website. So I got my stuff ready to do that, but then when I went on-line and started it, but things looked different on screen and I couldn't get the questions. Since I did it at home, there wasn't anyone that I could ask. I kept looking at the help screens but sometimes that didn't help either. 
For this student, filling out the FAFSA at home created a disadvantage because there was no one available to help her complete her form or interpret difficult instructions: "They said that it was something that you could do at home, but it is not easy to do that ... at least not for me." The student was not alone in her confusion. Other students shared similar sentiments: 
If I were to tell my brother or sister how to do this, I would tell them to make sure that a college counselor or someone who knows how to do the FAFSA sit right there and help because they're going to have questions, definitely. 
A student supported this advice: 
In the end, I did my FAFSA between three computers. First, I got my PIN and stuff in the library. Then, I did the tax information stuff at home. I had a bunch of questions so I had to finish it in the college center with a peer counselor. 
Visiting College and University Web Sites 
Many students who participated in the focus groups appreciated the possibility of "being able to get information at any time, without having to call" postsecondary institutions. As one student noted, 
I can go online and take my time to try to find some answers to questions without having to try to call ... it [calling on the phone] can be expensive, but the Internet isn't as expensive. I've wasted a lot of cell phone minutes trying to call financial aid during office hours. 
Another student shared the following: 
If I can find an answer without calling then, it's better for me. I don't like to call, I'm not sure what questions to ask, but this helps me because there are answers to questions without having to ask them. 
It is important to note that the students who shared these observations were discussing their experiences in visiting the Web sites of their individual institutions; not all institutions are equal. Students were reviewing the financial aid Web sites at University of California-Berkeley, University of Southern California, and California State University-Long Beach. Each of these institutions shares a common strength-online services that allow students to find answers to general questions on the main Web site, as well as personalized Web portals that include password-protected individual information on housing, registration, admission, and financial aid. 
Accessing general information was helpful to students, although navigating individualized Web portals proved to be a bit more difficult. Some students noted that accessing login and security pass codes proved to be intimidating: 
You have to have a student ID # and a login and an email to get into the financial aid information. So this makes it very complicated. If you don't have all of that log-in stuff, then you can't get online. 
Other students noted that because information was online, the expectation to get new information was the burden of the individual student rather than the active responsibility of the college: 
[Another student] and I are both going to the same school next year. I couldn't figure out how she always knew about her financial aid and I didn't. I never heard anything from the school. When I asked her about it, she told me that she goes to the [Web site portal] to get all of the information. I didn't know that we were supposed to do that. I thought that the school would just send the information to me. 
Students with plans to attend community colleges had different experiences. One community college student, who was eager to secure financial aid, recounted his online experience: 
I went to [the community college] website to find my financial aid forms. But when I got there, there were just forms to print out and then take to school. So I couldn't really do my financial aid stuff without having to go to the school. 
A student from another focus group told a similar story: "I can go to the website to find out that I have to apply for financial aid, but I can't really do anything online like I have heard some of my other friends do." This student, like many of the other students who participated in the focus groups, were not sure how the Internet fits into the larger scope of the many streams of communication that colleges use to recruit, admit, and enroll new students. 
Students understood that their experiences with their college Web sites were steps in connecting with their new schools. As the financial aid season progressed, students noted that they were more likely to rely on their school Web site: 
Since I know that I will be going to [a 4-year public institution] next year, I try to work with them more. Using the website to learn about things is one way to do that. And it's easier because I don't have to go to the school yet, and I don't have to wait on the phone to try to get in touch with someone during the day. 
Other students concurred with this observation. "It's probably good to do it that way because the way that you do things in college are different from high school, so this kind of makes a bridge that is easy, if you know how to do it." The changing expectation is that financial aid links at college Web sites are now an available and useful place to seek individual information, on demand, without the difficulty of speaking to a financial aid officer. At the level of the postsecondary institution, students expect 
to just be able to look it up on-line once all my [financial aid] papers are in. I might not know what to look for, but I think most people know that is where you can look once you get into a school. 
Visiting Fastweb.com and Collegeboard.com 
Web sites that offer multiple financial aid-based services were also mentioned during focus groups. Based on student responses, however, these "catchall" locations for financial aid information received mixed reviews. In some cases, students found these sites too difficult to decipher: "When you go on Fastweb, you fill out all of this information about your interests ... you think that you are going to get a lot of information about scholarships, but you don't. Well, I didn't." Other students shared similar comments: 
I thought that the site would help me to apply for scholarships, but it didn't. I went to look at other Web sites too, but in the end it was the same thing. They say there are a lot of choices, but it's hard to tell what they are. 
In other cases, students were quite satisfied with their experiences with Fastweb.com and similar Web sites. One student said, 
I applied for seven scholarships and I found them first through one of those [multipurpose financial aid] websites. What I would do was find them there and then go to another website, like the "home" website for a scholarship to get more information. 
Another student had a similar experience: "I didn't use Fastweb, I used another one, and I was able to sign up for like five scholarships that way. I already got one of them for $250." The keys to using these Web sites effectively were linked to time, patience, and individual learning. As one student noted, "For me, I had to spend a lot of time understanding how the website worked. There were instructions, but I didn't understand them. When I asked [the college counselor] for help, she didn't know it either." Because college counselors typically are not trained to use Web sites such as Fastweb.com or Scholarshipsearch.com, there may be few sources of formal support for navigating these types of financial aid-resource Web sites. 
Some students noted that site design also affected Web site effectiveness: "When there are so many pop-up windows, you don't know what to click on, you don't want to go to just any site, because there are bad ones." Trustworthiness of Web sites was discussed with more frequency when talking about financial aid-resource Web sites. A few students mentioned their parents' concerns as well: 
My mom was like, "Be careful when you go on those sites because I heard on the news that some of them are not real." When I told her that I was going on the school sites only, she was OK with it. 
Because of this particular parent's concern, this student decided not to visit any of these Web sites during his financial aid search. Other students took this approach as well: "I don't think that I have a good chance of getting a scholarship, so I decided to just go to the FAFSA and my school website." Although such sites typically offer additional information beyond scholarships, such as descriptions of the basic forms of financial aid and guidelines for taking out loans, by and large, these sites were used for scholarship searches. When asked about use of the services on financial aid-resource sites, students said that they relied more on college and university sites for this information: "I think that there will be information about loans and work-study from my college. Since they will be giving me loans, they will have the particular information that I need." 
Although financial aid-resource Web sites actively seek to provide a variety of information about financial aid options, they are typically viewed as scholarship sites. Yet these sites are often the general starting places visited by students. Students were initially impressed by the level of customer service that these sites provide: "I think the best thing about those sites is that they sent you an email giving you new information every week. I just think it would be better if they could keep it more personal." Over time, it seems that these sites are visited less often as students progress through their financial aid process. In addition, students are leery of Web sites that are not directly linked to a particular educational institution or governmental service. 
Summary of Findings 
Table 1 summarizes focus group feedback. Responses are organized by type of Web site service provider. 

Table 1 Student Responses About Financial Aid Web Site Experience 
Although the purpose of this article is not to evaluate individual Web sites, the data are presented in this manner because students categorized them this way when they shared their own ideas and comments about their online activities. Overall, students reported that (a) "using the Internet to apply for financial aid is a complicated thing to do," (b) "finding someone who knows the rules and can help you apply online is hard," and (c) "figuring out how to follow up on applications is tough." These findings suggest that even when students engage in the online process, they face challenges that are particular to their personal experiences. 
David and Keith: Individual Financial Aid Pathways 
In this section of data presentation, I outline the financial aid pathways of two low-income students who attended one of the high schools included in the survey and focus group data collection. David and Keith are low-income males with grade point averages of at least 3.5 and aspirations to attend a 4-year institution. David, a Latino student, will be the first in his family to attend college. Keith, an African American student, will also be the first in his family to begin postsecondary education. The following quotations by David and Keith are taken from interviews conducted in May 2005. 
David's Path: Teaching and Learning 
David began his "online journey" in the spring of his sophomore year: 
That's when I started to really look at colleges. I could use the Internet at school mostly. I decided to pick Loyola Marymount University because I wanted to go to a really small school that had my major. I think I looked at the financial aid page then but I didn't understand what it meant. 
Throughout the summer and fall of David's junior year, he continued to refine his college choices: 
For a while I thought about the UCs [Universities of California] because that is what everyone talks about a lot and they tell you that it is affordable. But then I found out how much it was by checking on-line at UCLA. . . . So then I compared it with Loyola . . . I saw that it wasn't much difference. 
As David continued to target his college dreams on attending Loyola Marymount University (LMU), he spent more time on the Internet: 
When we got a chance to look at colleges [at school], I would also look there. Because I spent more and more time there, I looked at financial aid maybe more. I started to see some scholarships that I could apply for at the [LMU] site, and then I went to Fastweb.com because I heard that they had scholarships too. 
When asked how he heard about Fastweb.com, even more is learned about David's college preparation pathway: "I heard about Fastweb.com because I am a peer counselor. We have training in the summer before school starts and we learn about financial aid and scholarships. That is how I found out about the FAFSA website too." David's involvement in college peer counseling is strategic: 
I heard about peer counseling after I told my counselor like three times that I wanted to go to college and needed to know how. She signed me up to be a peer counselor. Because I have peer counseling as a senior, I get a whole class period to have access to the web and to [the college counselor] to help me with questions. I knew that I had to do something to give me the time to do this stuff. 
David's decision to become a peer counselor paid off: 
So now this year, I get an hour everyday to work on-line or work with students. If I have questions, I can look things up. If they have questions, I can look things up with them. It's better for me because I get practice in knowing what I am doing. 
David used all three types of Web sites that the focus group participants noted: 
I started with Fastweb.com because you can apply for scholarships sooner, like in 1 Oth grade they say, but I never did that. Then I looked more at the LMU site. When it came time to do FAFSA, I was ready in January. 
David completed his FAFSA by January 3, only 3 days into the official priority filing period for federal student aid. 
Because of his experience with online processes, David's FAFSA application process was completed with ease: "I had already looked at it before I knew that I need a PIN." David completed his FAFSA, reviewed his SAR, and received his Expected Family Contribution all within the first 2 weeks of the FAFSA filing period. In comparison with his admission application, the FAFSA process was "almost easier, no essay to write, and you just have to give whatever answer they ask for, no guessing." Unfortunately, David made a few mistakes when "putting in the adjusted gross income and the amount of tax paid," so he had to make changes, resubmit, and then review his profile again. He expected that these changes would be processed in a timely manner so he did not go online to double check: "Around that time, I was really busy helping other students and I thought that it would just get fixed, I didn't know that I would have to check with FAFSA and then LMU." 
David was admitted to LMU as a Latino Scholar. His family was invited to attend a special preview day at the college. To prepare for this visit, David spent more time reviewing the Web site: "I guess I keep looking to see if the information has changed and just to make sure that I understand things. It's up to me to know because my parents can't." While at the preview day, David learned that by submitting his enrollment commitment deposit, he would be assigned his own personal login and password to access his registration, financial aid, and housing information: 
When I got my personal login to go online, the first place that I went to was financial aid. I hadn't heard back from them so that is when I saw that they didn't have my right FAFSA information. This time I called instead of email or anything. 
Although David had confidence in the online process, he decided that he needed to speak to someone in person to resolve this important issue: "After I called, I kept checking the financial aid offer, like everyday. I was really nervous about it. I finally got my updated offer in April, so now I have everything set for the year." When asked about keeping records of his financial aid transactions, he replied that he "relied mainly on the web and on what was saved in my email . . . and mainly at home because the personal stuff you don't want to print at school." David's financial aid offer was set and he was expecting the offer that appeared on his online Web portal to be his final financial aid package. 
Keith's Journey: Paper and Patience 
Although Keith was a participant in a college preparation program, he did not engage in his search for financial aid until December of his senior year: "I knew that I had to think about financial aid because I heard about it in [my college preparation program]. Really, though, I just couldn't worry about it until after I finished applying for colleges." Keith's college choices "began at the UC's, but then . . . I figured out that I had a better chance of doing well at the CSUs [California State Universities]." Keith decided to focus on CSU campuses rather than UC campuses because "they are supposed to be a little bit easier academically, and I found out that they are cheaper when I visited some of the campuses in October." About 1 month before the college admission deadline, Keith selected four CSU campuses to apply to-all campuses within 2 hours of his home and that offer basketball programs. Although Keith knew that he would not "be recruited for a scholarship anywhere," he said, "I know that I'm good enough to walk on." Because of his high school basketball, college preparation program, and the demands of his calculus class, Keith said that he "didn't have much time to go on-line to explore financial aid. I thought I pretty much knew all about it from my college prep stuff anyway and from visiting individual campuses." 
When the federal financial aid Web application became available in January, Keith participated in a few workshops as part of his college preparation program: 
We did practice sheets on paper, so we could be ready to do the process on-line. I showed my papers to my mom though, and she wanted me to turn my stuff in on paper. But, my teachers at [the college preparation program] told me that I should do it on the web. So, because of that, I waited a few weeks before I decided what to do. 
Keith carried a partially completed paper FAFSA in his backpack during January and the first few weeks of February. He prepared his FAFSA for mailing and even bought stamps before realizing that he "did the pre-worksheet for the web FAFSA, not the long paper form, so then I was stuck." 
Keith's decision to wait meant that he did not begin the Web-based FAFSA process until a few weeks before the deadline. He completed his FAFSA both at home and at school: 
I did most of it at home because my mom wanted to be there to help me and make sure that I was getting things done right. She didn't understand a lot of it either. It took us a while to get it right. 
"Getting it right" meant not only providing income information for Keith's family but also going through the many steps of the Web-based aid process: 
We had to get a PIN, and we didn't know that. So that took a few days. Then we had to use the PIN to get back online. So again, that took a few days. Stuff like that took up time. 
Once Keith was able to complete the online financial aid process, he was not sure how to follow up: 
I think the main thing in my college prep program is that we get the FAFSA done and think about applying for scholarships. But things have been so crazy this year that no one has really followed up with us on it yet. 
Keith made these comments 2 months after the state and federal financial aid deadlines. His comments were also made in the midst of three staffing changes in his college preparation program and the college advising staff: "Luckily, I have a counselor who can help me, which is good because things have been changing a lot." Although Keith believed in his counselor, he did not turn to her for help with financial aid processing. He was not sure of the next steps in the financial aid process. Because he did not provide a correct e-mail address for follow-up, his SAR was sent to his home. 
When Keith and I met for his interview and I mentioned his SAR, he told me that he did not know what this term meant. After a short discussion, Keith realized that he had received this information in the mail, but he had not responded: 
Well, I got it on paper this time, not from an email or anything so I thought it was something different. This is too confusing, if I would have done this all on paper, then I would have had copies of everything . . . and maybe know what to expect. 
Because Keith was not sure what the next steps of the financial aid process were, he waited to hear from either his intended postsecondary institution or the federal government. He expected to hear from them on paper: 
I know that my Cal Grant [state aid] was done on-line and I got a paper letter, so I think that my other information will come that way too. I have been so busy that I haven't had time to check. Plus, really, I don't know what questions to ask if I call or where to look on the Internet. It's hard to find time to do these things at school when I might have a chance to ask for help. 
Even though Keith was in a college preparation program, he was not sure how to negotiate between paper- and Web-based processes. Because Keith would have preferred a paper process and felt "like I had to do it on the web because that was how it was taught," he was disengaged and in some ways intimidated by the process. 
Summary: Individual Similarities and Differences 
Although it is not possible to account for all of the individual differences in Keith's and David's respective financial aid processes, it is clear that David's progressive experience with Web-based resources enabled him to advocate for himself and others during the financial aid process. David's access to Internet-linked computers on a daily basis helped him to build the comfort level needed to keep at the complicated financial aid process from the application to the offer letter stage. In contrast, Keith's access to similar resources was undercut by a lack of familiarity with Web-based processes. Keith knew that such Web sites existed, but his limited hands-on experiences and opportunities for teaching and learning affected his ability to confidently engage in the online processes. David was able to navigate the financial aid process, obtaining a financial aid offer prior to his enrollment commitment. Keith was still waiting for his preliminary offer less than 3 months before his 1st day of college-level courses. 
Conclusion: Defining the Divide 
Despite past findings that low-income students have little access to computers and the Internet (National Telecommunications and Information Administration, 1999; Resta, 1994), the students who participated in this study reported computer access in multiple places: home, school, and community. Although access to computing equipment may be increasing, going online for college processes presents more complicated issues. Using financial aid Web sites seems to be a tricky task. Entering passwords, social security numbers, and other personal information seem to further complicate the process. 
There are two facets of the cultural ecological perspective to consider when thinking about the Internet and financial aid: material resources and instrumental knowledge. Computers, as a material resource, are a real part of the interlocking environments in which low-income students exist. Very few students discussed a concern with having access to a computer as part of the challenge of engaging in financial aid searches or online application processes. Many of the necessary components that Brown (2000) outlined in his discussion of what it takes to learn in digital society are available to students in these contexts. What is missing from these particular environments is access to the instrumental knowledge that is needed to effectively navigate the financial aid process. 
Focus group and case study data recount the various missteps by students during the financial aid process. Problems with beginning, completing, and following up on Web-based application processes were common. Students perceived a disconnection between Web-based resources and telephone or in-person follow-up with financial aid agencies. Case study participants held variations of the same belief. Keith, in particular, was quite confused about how, when, and who might respond to his federal financial aid application. If using the Internet to seek financial aid is meant to be a transformative medium for access to higher education, more attention needs to be paid to the training, design, and advertising of financial aid Web sites. 
Students' stories recount a lack of instrumental knowledge and access to that knowledge when navigating the financial aid process, particularly when going online. From the cultural ecological perspective, this instrumental knowledge was rarely available in school, peer, or familial environments. Students understood that there were three basic types of financial aid Web sites: government based, school based, and financial aid-resource based. They were typically aware of the federal financial aid process via the FAFSA and Web-based scholarship search engines, such as those available through Fastweb.com or Collegeboard.com. Many students also knew key financial aid deadline information for state and federal applications. Although this information served as a beginning and in some cases, jumpstarted the ongoing process of financial aid acquisition, students displayed a lack of knowledge about the follow-through processes of financial aid. Students were unaware of how to check on the status of their financial aid applications, scholarship applications, and financial aid offers. Important information regarding application mistakes and correction approvals went undiscovered in e-mail boxes that were rarely used. Individual student information portals were not activated in a timely manner, preventing students from accessing time-sensitive information. 
Because of little to no training of college counseling staff and/or students at the high school site, many students engaged in financial aid processes online without a clear understanding of how to be a proactive advocate for one's own financial aid process. In the many cases in which students reported that they relied on the Internet as their only source of financial aid information, communication between the individual and financial aid agencies were lost in cyberspace. Such miscommunication may delay and even negate low-income students' college goals. The following implications and suggestions for future research might help to resolve some of these difficult situations. 
Implications for Research and Change 
More nationally based research with up-to-date surveys on computer use in and out of school should be developed. A study that delineates the number and type of computers available to low-income students should also include a consideration of how many computers are Web accessible, functioning, and available to students at the school site. Even though most students reported access to computers, it is not clear that access was available to all students. Quite often, I observed empty computer labs in one area of school and broken, inaccessible computers in the college counseling area. Additional research that traces students' use of the Internet for financial aid can illuminate when, how, and why students choose to use the Web for this purpose. As shown in the stories of David and Keith, the timing and frequency of the Internet for financial aid purposes can yield different levels of competency and aid packaging. One final possibility for future research is a close examination of students' use of financial aid-resource scholarship search engines and sites. A study that traces the individual experiences of students who actively use these sites might create a stronger picture of how these sites influence and can continue to affect students' financial aid options. 
There are two implications for change that can be suggested based on the data presented in this article. First, students need to have a clear understanding of the timing and process of financial aid acquisition from beginning to end. Completing a financial aid application is simply one of the starting-point activities in the aid process. Students should not be led to believe that completing applications are an ending rather than a beginning. Second, students, parents, and counselors need to have specific training for using Web-based financial aid sites. Training should include the actual use of a computer with live Internet access. Completing an aid application the day before the priority deadline should not be the first time that students, parents, or counselors see the aid application Web site. Just as use of the telephone and in-person inquiries are acceptable forms of seeking financial aid information, so too should be Web-based inquiry. As more and more colleges and universities move to Web-based financial aid processes (Frazier, 2003), all students, especially low-income students, and their families need to understand this process from beginning to end as an online and ongoing process.

