https://search-proquest-com.libproxy2.usc.edu/docview/198572757/65E7381ACB3047A1PQ/6?accountid=14749

Google Wins Internet Content License in China; Google wins preliminary approval from Beijing to provide Internet content in China, potentially allowing it to offer news in the world's second-largest Internet market.
Reuters. eWeek; New York (Jun 20, 2007): 1.

SHANGHAI (Reuters)-Google Inc. has won preliminary approval from Beijing to provide Internet content in China, the firm said on Wednesday, potentially allowing it to offer news in the world's second-largest Internet market.
The license, handed out by China's Ministry of Information and Industry, may also help Google attract more advertising revenue, analysts said.
"We have made very positive progress on the ICP (Internet content provider) application and have received preliminary approval," spokeswoman Marsha Wang said in an e-mailed response to Reuters enquiries.
She declined to comment on what further procedures may be required for final approval to offer news in China, although analysts said the move helped to add legitimacy to its operations in the country.
"It's definitely a very positive move for Google," said Edward Yu, president of Beijing-based research firm Analysys International.
"The license to provide content to audiences is critical to attract big advertisers, and also helps them try to have more content."
China's Web search market leader, Baidu.com Inc., received a license at the beginning of this year to provide news in China.
Baidu had 21 percent of China's 1.37 billion yuan ($180 million) online advertising market in the first quarter of 2007, Analysys said, compared with 7 percent for Google China.
Word count: 224
Copyright (c) 2007 Ziff Davis Media Inc. All Rights Reserved. Originally appearing in eWEEK.com.

NEW PEW INTERNET DATA ON PARENTS, INTERNET USE
US Fed News Service, Including US State News; Washington, D.C. [Washington, D.C]24 Oct 2007.
The Pew Initiative on Food and Biotechnology issued the following news release:
Parents are engaged with their children's media consumption, but have less positive views of the internet today than they did in 2004. A new data memo issued by the Pew Internet and American Life Project based on a telephone survey in October-November 2006 found that 59% of parents think the internet has been a good thing for their children, down from 67% in 2004.
The majority of parents check up on their teens' internet use-65% say that they check to see what websites their teenagers visit. An even larger percentage of parents have rules about media consumption; 77% of parents have some sort of rule about what their regulated their teenage children's media use.
The majority of parents also say that digital technology makes their lives easier, but their children are even more positive about the benefits of digital devices. 88% of teens report that information and communication devices make their lives easier, compared with 69% of their parents.
Word count: 183
Copyright © HT Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved.


