Internet Use by Hospice Families and Providers: A Review 

Lia Willis  George Demiris · Debra Parker Oliver Received: 18 April 2006 / Accepted: 14 June 2006 / Published online: 23 March 2007 C Springer Science+Business Media, Inc. 2007 Abstract This literature review explores the current evidence related to use of the Internet by hospice patients or families and palliative care/hospice professionals. The research questions guiding this study pertain to the current Internet-based interventions in hospice and palliative care and the evidence of their effectiveness. Six studies were identified as a result of an extensive literature review. These studies included research about web-based clinical interventions for patients, and patients’, caregivers’ and hospice/palliative care providers’ use of the Internet. The majority of interventions involve accessing information via the Internet. Participants among the studies included patients, caregivers/family members, and health care professionals. Findings overall indicate effectiveness of Internet-based interventions. Both patients and professionals are using the Internet to find answers to healthcare questions, communicate, and/or deliver healthcare interventions. Keywords Internet . Hospice care . Internet-based interventions . Palliative care Introduction In 2003, 62% or 70 million households in the United States had computers, and 55% had Internet access [1]. While only 22–33% of those over 65 had access to the Internet [2, 3] those numbers were drastically larger in the age group of 50–65. As access to the Internet continues to expand, and the population ages, web based health related interventions L. Willis · G. Demiris () · D. P. Oliver University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, MO 65211-2060, USA e-mail: gdemiris@gmail.com will likely gain in popularity. Such interventions can cover a broad range of health related domains, pertaining not only to specific diseases or treatments, but also to care delivered at the end of life. Hospice is a specialized interdisciplinary program of care for the dying. The focus of this care is on maintaining a patient’s quality of life and palliating symptoms, rather than on attempting to cure their terminal disease. This philosophy of care, initially offered by volunteer professionals committed to the cause, became a formal part of the US healthcare system in 1982 when it was eligible for Medicare coverage. The number of hospice programs has grown dramatically since that time, as the number of Medicare beneficiaries using the service has more than doubled from 1992 to 1998 [4]. Utilization of hospice varies throughout the United States. A recent study found that minority, low-income, older, and rural Medicare beneficiaries are less likely to receive hospice than white, high-income, younger, or urban terminally ill patients [4]. Most hospice patients are elderly. The National Hospice and Palliative Care Organization reported that more than 80% of hospice recipients are over the age of 65 [5]. The Kaiser Family Foundation [3] reported that seniors are using the Internet less than younger adults, (31% of adults aged 65 and older have gone online) but that 70% of persons 50–64 have used the Internet. According to Fox, [2] 66% of seniors who have Internet access have used the Internet to obtain health information. Hospice providers may want to consider the feasibility of web based interventions to assist in reaching patients and their caregivers, especially in geographically isolated areas, as a strategy to improve services and access to their patients and family members. Patients and caregivers can also utilize web applications to access online information but also from online support groups and share resources. Springer 98 J Med Syst (2007) 31:97–101 The purpose of this literature review is to explore the extent of Internet usage by hospice patients or families and palliative care/hospice professionals. The research questions guiding this study are: 1. What are the current Internet-based interventions in hospice and palliative care? 2. What is the reported effectiveness of those Internet-based interventions? Methods A literature search was conducted in February of 2006. Studies were identified from a step by step search of three separate databases: Medline (1966–2005), Psychinfo (1967–2005) and CINAHL (1982–2005), without limitation to publication date. Terms included “hospice or terminal care or palliative care or end of life care or hospice care” and “Internet or computer or computer mediated communication or Internet or world wide web or web site.” The combination of these terms resulted in 25 articles from Psychinfo. A search with these terms of the Ovid Medline database resulted in 104 citations (after removing 3 duplicate citations). The search of CINAHL resulted in 270 articles but 29 of these were all duplicates from the previous searches, resulting in 241 new articles. Inclusion criteria required the articles to be published in English. Editorials, unpublished papers, reviews, announcements of websites, and conceptual or theoretical articles were excluded. Many of the resultant citations involved telemedicine/telehospice or Internet usage in healthcare; however, for this study, only intervention studies involving both hospice/palliative care and usage of the Internet were included. Intervention studies were defined as designed initiatives introducing a new tool, new or modified procedures in the hospice setting that deviated from standard routine practice. Results After applying the above criteria, only six journal articles were selected as appropriate for this review. Reference lists of the articles chosen were hand-searched but did not yield more articles to be included in this review. See Table 1 for a breakdown of excluded articles. The studies included research about medical interventions with patients [6, 7], patient and caregiver use of the Internet [8, 9], hospice/palliative care providers’ general use of the Internet [10, 11]. Researchers used a variety of tools, including chatrooms, digital pens and pain diaries. Participants among the studies included patients, caregivers/family members, and professionals working with hospice/palliative care patients. Table 2 provides Table 1 Reasons for excluding indexed studies Reason for exclusion Database Book Regarding palliative care but not Internet Regarding Internet but not palliative care Not an intervention study Psychinfo 1 8 4 11 Medline 22 11 66 CINAHL 31 3 206 a summary of the articles included in the review and their sample size. The current Internet-based interventions discussed in the articles in this review include information seeking (patient and provider), support (patient), pain management (patient and provider) and consultation (patient and provider). In the context of information seeking, hospice care providers’ responses indicated obtaining professional journal articles and consultations online, [10, 11] while patients wrote about finding out information about their illnesses and treatments online [9]. Lind and Karlsson [7] used the Internet as a pain assessment and management tool. None of the included studied followed a randomized clinical trial design. Five of the studies were descriptive [6, 7, 8, 10, 11] and used survey instruments (one of these was based on an intervention introducing videophones and thus was also a feasibility study [6] and lastly, one relied on a content analysis of transcriptions resulting from online communication [9]. In the following the studies are described in detail. Medical interventions with patients This review identified two articles describing medical interventions involving (1) use of the Internet by hospice patients and caregivers which involved the use of digital pens [7] and (2) the use of videophones [6]. Both articles described this equipment as being used to aid in communication between patient/caregiver and professional. The digital pen was used primarily for pain assessment, and the videophone was used for physical assessment as well as communication. Use of the digital pen involved the participant (or caregiver) rating their pain on digital paper with the digital pen. The information was sent through a server and the information was made available to the healthcare providers. According to Lind and Karlsson [7], the results of the digital pen usage were positive, in general; patients were seen as receiving better care and improved contact between caregivers and professionals was also seen as a positive result. The sample size included 12 patients. Bensink et al. [6] reported positive results form the videophone usage, offering the capability of physical assessment and communication that is more personal in nature due to adding the video Springer J Med Syst (2007) 31:97–101 99 Table 2 Overview of all studies included in the review Author N Study design Intervention Outcome measures Results Bensink, et al 1 Case study Videophone field testing, 6 clinical consultations, lab testing, then additional field testing ISP monitored phone performance The videophone component adds a personal component, makes limited physical assessment possible, provides continuity of care, and the conference call capability is useful Lind and Karlsson 12 Questionnaire Digital pens for use in pain assessments Pain diary 3 × daily, pain assessment instrument, assessment printouts Patients perceived better quality of care, caregiver contact Increased, and there was good overall patient satisfaction Long, et al 122 Internet survey Online survey over 5 months in 1999 Pilot study, survey results Reasons professionals use a computer included: internet access, email, word processing, and online educational opportunities (to avoid costs of travel) Coleman, et al 600 postings Descriptivenarrative Online postings in chatroom analyzed for content Pretest, FAQ module implemented, posttest Themes of postings included information seeking and giving, support seeking and giving, and reporting deaths Pereira, et al. (2001) 417 Internet survey Online survey over 4 months in 1998 Providers’ online information seeking and behavior Reasons for going online included finding clinical information, email and accessing online journals. 72% applied online information to their practice Pereira et al (2000) 9 Review of case studies, survey Survey of 9 cases-patients seeking information online Patients’ online information seeking and behavior Patients enjoy the anonymity of online support groups, go online to find information about alternative treatments, and find out information about their respective illness component. Additionally, the conferencing ability of the videophones offered improvements in communication [6]. This study was a case study focusing on one subject only. Internet use by hospice professionals Pereira [10] focused on hospice staff use of the Internet with an online survey. Survey responses were directly linked to a database, eliminating the data entry step and speeding the process of data analysis. The total number of respondents in the study was 417 and 56% of them indicated going online to obtain information on the web, including electronic journals and live consultation. The majority of professionals surveyed said they applied the information gleaned from the Internet. The top reasons given for using the Internet were: finding clinical information, accessing email, and accessing online journals. Similar to Pereira’s 2001 study Long, et al.[11]researched home health and hospice professionals’ use of computers and found that 94% of the 122 respondents reported having use of a PC, and 88% use computers at work. Respondents indicated using the computer for going online, retrieving email, and word processing. Participants indicated a need for more online training opportunities to obtain continuing education credits. Internet use by hospice patients and caregivers To find out why patients and families go online, Pereira, et al. [8] reviewed nine cases. They found that patients use the Internet for support and information seeking. The case studies showed patients enjoy the anonymity of online support groups, go online to find information about alternative treatments, and find out information about their respective illness. According to Pereira et al. [8], patients enjoyed the prospect of anonymity offered by online support groups, as well as the ease of accessing information online. Coleman et al. [9] similarly found that caregivers use the Internet to find information, and seek support. Coleman and colleagues analyzed 600 Internet postings at a pancreatic cancer website, before and after a FAQ section was put into place on the website. Posters to the chat room used the website to gather information, seek support, or report a condition. They found that participants in the chat room also took the time to report on a loved one’s death, indicating a connection to the other posters. They found that caregivers used the website more frequently than persons with cancer. Springer 100 J Med Syst (2007) 31:97–101 Discussion This study was guided by two research questions: (1) what are the current Internet-based interventions in hospice and palliative care? (2) what is the reported effectiveness of those Internet-based interventions? Although few studies were found that answer these questions, they provided insight into the use and effectiveness of Internet usage. These questions will be addressed separately. None of the discussed studies followed the design of a randomized clinical trial and thus, effectiveness of web based interventions is not documented. However, the implications of Internet-based interventions were, overall, positive. Patients using the Internet to report pain reported they had more contact with their providers. Providers reported being able to access information quickly, through journals and online training opportunities, and apply what they have learned to their practice. Patients reported finding support groups and other information helpful, as well. Caregivers look for information and support, and may be more prone to access the Internet than patients [9]. It seems clear from these studies that patients and professionals are using the Internet to find answers to healthcare questions, communicate, and/or deliver healthcare interventions. The results of these studies were generally positive; participants seemed to benefit from the interactions they had via the Internet. Use of the Internet for information gathering (accessing databases, online journals, etc) appears to be widespread, according to the studies in this review. It is not being suggested in this article that there are not enough Internet based interventions; many studies were found that focused on cancer and the Internet, for example. The focus of this review, however, was specifically on palliative or hospice care and not on a more general spectrum of terminal diseases. There are several reasons Internet interventions with hospice patients may have not been studied. One reason may be that the average length of stay in hospice is around 50 days (12). Technology requiring a learning curve may not be helpful to patients and caregivers and may, in fact, seem an extra burden on caregivers already experiencing high levels of stress. Another reason may be that patients and families struggling to accept hospice care may find a technological component off-putting. They may already have fears they are not going to be cared for, since they are no longer going to be pursuing aggressive treatment, and if they think technology will be replacing one-on-one visits, they may not be willing to try the technology. It may be more useful to patients and caregivers to see technology as having the potential to open up social networks of patients and caregivers. The Internet can be used to create peer to peer communities and can allow more access to information, and to address isolation, rather than as a substitute for patient care. Current hospice patients who are elderly may not have experience with the Internet, but in the future, it is expected that more people will have access to and familiarity with the Internet and its possibilities. Limitations This study has limitations, one being sample size. This study was grounded in only six studies, two of which came from the same journal; this leaves room for possible journal bias. The results of the Internet surveys themselves may be biased, as they were available over the Internet only, leaving those without Internet access out of the study. If random samples had been obtained, different results may have been seen (less percentage overall of Internet users, for example). Sample size of the included studies was also relatively small, considering the large population of healthcare providers. The pool of studies for this review was delimited by the databases used and the search strategy identified in the methods section. These results are a beginning, however, to finding out more about Internet usage in and hospice care patients and professionals. Implications Many questions remain unanswered from this review. For example, it remains to be determined how patients feel about communicating with their healthcare provider over the Internet in the context of palliative care and how healthcare providers feel about delivering advice over the Internet. Furthermore, we need to explore whether the use of the Internet in hospice care may be viewed as a replacement for or an addition to in home services. Some of these questions should be answered before an intervention using the Internet is designed. Obviously, this study provides evidence that extensive future research is needed in this area. Acknowledgments This study was supported in part by the University of Missouri Research Board Award 2005–2006.
