ABSTRACT
The banking industry in Oman is of major importance to Oman's economy, yet Omani banks continue to conduct most of their transactions using traditional methods. A strong banking industry significantly supports economic development through efficient financial services, and their role in trying to achieve the objectives outlined by the Sultan of Oman will depend heavily on the industry's capabilities. Omni banks will need to introduce change at both procedural and informational levels that includes moving from traditional distribution channel banking to electronic channel banking. This paper addresses the question: What are the enablers and the inhibitors of Internet technology adoption in the Omani banking industry compared with those in the Australian banking industry? The paper does not attempt a direct comparison of the banking industries in these two very different countries, but rather presents a discussion of Internet technology adoption in Oman, informed by the more mature Australian experience.
Keywords: banking IS; business/IT strategy alignment; business strategy; customer relations; e-business; electronic business; electronic infrastructure; Internet adoption; Internet infrastructure; Internet security, Internet trust; IT in developing countries; IT innovation; online banking
INTRODUCTION
In developed countries such as Australia, Internet technologies have been embraced by the banking industry and, for several years, banks have pursued strategies to encourage their clients to engage in Internet banking. In an article relating to online banking portals, Ayadi (2007) notes the diversity of competitive, technical, and strategic challenges faced by banks on the Internet. In developing countries, financial institutions have been less inclined to adopt Internet technology and thereby capitalize on the benefits of simplicity, convenience, and usefulness claimed to be associated with its implementation. Oman is an example of a developing country committed to economic growth but with a banking industry that is yet to embrace Internet technology.
Traditionally, Oman has been heavily reliant on oil as its main income source. Fluctuations in world oil prices, however, can leave the country exposed to commodity price risk and during the 1990s Oman began to diversify its income sources. His Majesty, the Sultan of Oman, summarized his vision for Oman's economy as follows:
The government has made major efforts in recent years to achieve comprehensive development in all fields. Now that it has succeeded, with the help of God, in moving the country from a traditional economy to a modern developed one, our future plan will be based on the balanced management of income and expenditure and the preservation of that balance so that Oman's present high prestige in the economic sphere, will be preserved. Therefore, the duty of the private sector in playing an active role in the development of economic process and in the achievement of national goals by taking appropriate initiatives, as is the case in all developed countries, is of great importance (Qaboos bin Said's speech, June 2, 1995, reported in Oman Ministry of Development, 1996).
Since the development of the Omani banking industry in 1948, all banks have relied heavily on traditional distribution channels for banking services. However, in 1997, the Oman telecommunication company, Omantel, introduced Internet services to home and business users. According to the statistics provided by Omantel (2002) in their annual report, the number of Internet technology users had reached 12,348 in 1998, 1 year after of its introduction. By 2002 Omantel reported that the number of Internet users had reached 48,000, making up around 2% of the general population. Indeed, Internet technology infrastructure has grown steadily over the years but has only had a moderate effect on the Omani economy. The Omani banking industry has been very slow and cautious in moving from traditional distribution channel banking services to electronic distribution channel banking services (Al-Hajri, 2005).
Paradoxically, the growing number of users of Internet technology in the Omani economy has not yet motivated the Omani banking industry to adopt Internet technology the way the Australian banking industry has done. The Market Intelligence Strategy Centre (MISC, 2002) reported that in 2002 there were six million Internet banking users in the Australian banking industry, reinforcing the observation that Internet technology is far more developed in the Australia than in Oman. Other analysts (Wright & Ralston, 2002) expect Internet technology to grow substantially in the Australian banking industry, which means that the Omani banks will be left lagging further behind global competitive markets.
In every country the banking industry is important, as a strong banking industry can have a significant affect in supporting economic development through efficient financial services. In Oman the role of the banking industry in trying to achieve the objectives outlined by the Sultan depends heavily on the industry's capabilities and banks need to introduce change, both at the procedural level and at the informational level. This change includes moving from traditional distribution channel banking to electronic distribution channel banking. Given the prevalence of Internet technology adoption by the banking industry in developed countries, reasons for the lack of such innovation in developing countries such as Oman are of considerable importance.
There are, of course, huge cultural differences between Oman and Australia and a direct comparison of the two is not the intent of this article. The backgrounds, economics, societies, and indeed the very way of life in the two countries are all very different. Australian banks have already largely adopted Internet technologies while Omani banks are just beginning to do so. The goal of this article is to discuss adoption of Internet technology in the banking industry in Oman, with reference to the Australian experience in order to identify possible ways forward. This article will thus address the question of determining inhibitors and enablers to the adoption of Internet technology in the banking industry in Oman, and inform the Oman experience by the more mature Australian experience.
TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Internet technology has played a major role in economic development in developed countries (Ghosh, 1998; Kalakota & Whinston, 1997; Raisinghani, 2000), but less so in developing countries and economies. A good deal has been written about adoption of new technologies and techniques in agriculture in developing countries (e.g., Lee, 2005; Michelsen & Hartwich, 2004; Paarlberg, 2003), but not so much has been recently written on adoption of other technologies.
Montealegre (1999) describes a study of Internet adoption in four Latin American countries in which he notes a gradual but progressive course of institutional adoption actions including knowledge building, subsidy, knowledge deployment, innovation directive, and standard setting. Basant, Commander, Harrison and Menezes-Filho (2006) report on the determinants of information and communication technology (ICT) adoption and its impact on performance on manufacturing firms in Brazil and India. They suggest that while Brazilian firms on average use ICT more intensively than their Indian counterparts, in both countries ICT intensity is strongly related to size, ownership structure, share of administrative workers, and education. Rajapakse and Seddon (2007) explore the adoption of ERP software in Asia using Hofstede's dimensions of national cultures and conclude that contrasting dimensions of the cultural practices embedded in ERP software are a barrier to adoption. Molla and Licker (2005) report that their studies of e-commerce in developing countries emphasize the influence of contextual impediments including economic, technological, legal, and financial infrastructure as major determinants of adoption. Talukdar, Sudhir and Ainslie (2006) investigate new product diffusion across products and countries, and note that diffusion is much slower in developing than developed countries.
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
It has been suggested that "? explaining human behavior in all its complexity is a difficult task" (Ajzen, 1991). Further, to this we will argue that the main complexity in understanding Internet technology adoption behavior, or that lack of it, within the context of the banking industry in Oman (a non-adopter) and Australia (an adopter) is that this involves people such as bank managers and customers, and people behave in different ways. In deriving a framework for this study, four existing research frameworks were considered: the theory of reasoned action (TRA), the theory of planned behavior (TPB), the technology acceptance model (TAM), and diffusion of innovations.
The Theory of Rreasoned Aaction (TRA)
Fishbein and Ajzen (1975) originally developed the theory of reasoned action in 1975, before later comprehensively refining it with empirical evidence to support its validity and reliability (Ajzen & Fishbein, 1980). In developing their theory, they integrated various studies on attitude from social psychology with the aim of developing an integrated conceptual framework to predict and explain an individual's behavior in a general situational setting. In sum, their study focused on three major determinants of an individual's behavior: behavioral intention , attitude, and subjective norm. They illustrated their model using these three major variables in a hierarchical sequence to facilitate understanding. In summary they postulated that:
1. An individual's behavioral intention is the immediate determinant of behavior.
2. His/her attitude and subjective norm are mediated through behavioral intention.
3. His/her behavioral and normative beliefs are mediated through attitude and subjective norm respectively.
In predicting and explaining behavior, TRA has been applied in various fields including consumer behavior (Engel, Blackwell, & Miniard, 1995; Taylor & Todd, 1997; Thomson, Haziris, & Alekos, 1994), moral behavior (Vallerand, Pelletier, Deshaies, Cuerrier, & Mongeau, 1992), ethical/unethical behavior (Chang, 1998; Gibson & Frakes, 1997; Loch & Conger, 1996), environmental behavior (Goldenhar & Connell, 1993), coupon usage behavior (Bagozzi, Davis, & Warshaw, 1992; Shimp & Kavas, 1984), fast food consumption behavior (Bagozzi, Wong, Abe, & Bergami, 2000), adoption of strategic information systems (IS) behavior (Mykytyn & Harison, 1993), system investment decision behavior (Clark & Soliman, 1999), information technology (IT) adoption behavior (Karahanna, Straub, & Cherveny, 1999), and Internet use behavior (Bobbitt & Dabholkar, 2001).
Although TRA has gained wide acceptance in the behavioral sciences and the IS literature due to its well integrated paradigm, the likelihood that a person will actually perform the specific behavior described has been questioned by many researchers (e.g., Warshaw & Davis, 1985; Davis, Bagozzi, & Warshaw, 1989). For example, in a situation where there is a gap between behavioral intention and actual behavior, some studies have found a low correlation between behavioral these (Bonfield, 1974; Harrell & Bennett, 1974).
The Theory of Planned Bbehavior (TPB)
After identifying problems with TRA, Ajzen (1991) came up with a modification: the theory of planned behavior (TPB). His main criticisms of TRA were that it was designed to predict and explain behavior, or actions, based on the assumption that the behavior was under a person's volitional control. He argues, however, that some behavior that is not under a person's volitional control might be problematic due to the differences in individuals' abilities and in external forces. This may have an influence on actual performance of the behavior and, therefore, consideration should be given to the concept of behavioral control to overcome these volitional control problems. To achieve this, Ajzen extended the theory of reasoned action by adding another construct called perceived behavioral control, which refers to an individual's perception of the "? presence or absence of requisite resources and opportunities" (Ajzen & Madden, 1986) required to perform the specific behavior.
Like the theory of reasoned action, the theory of planned behavior assumes that behavioral intention is a function of two determinants: the individual's attitude towards the behavior and the subjective norm within the social environment. Ajzen (1991) argues, however, that the inclusion of perceived behavioral control is important, and provided two rationales for this: it is expected that perceived behavioral control will increase the likelihood of success in performing the behavior, and it is expected that it will provide a measure of actual control. Its validity as a measure to predict the likelihood of achieving the target behavior will depend on the individual's capability (e.g., having the requisite opportunities and resources) to exercise control over the specific behavior. This means that a person who believes that they have the resources and opportunities expects fewer problems in performing the specific behavior and hence perceives that they have complete control over the specific behavior.
Ajzen (1991) reviewed several studies employing TPB and found support for it, more evidence also being found in various situational settings. These studies include: task performance (Locke, Fredrick, Lee, & Bobko, 1984), attending class and weight loss (Shifter & Ajzen, 1985), obtaining grades (Ajzen & Madden, 1986), investment decisions (East, 1993), consumer behavior (Sparks & Shepherd, 1992), dishonest behavior (Beck & Ajzen, 1991), ethical behavior (Kurland, 1995; Randall & Gibson, 1991), leisure activities (Ajzen & Driver, 1992), executives' adoption of IT in small business (Harrison, Mykytyn, & Riemenschneider, 1997), adoption of virtual banking (Liao, Shao, Wang, & Chen, 1999), learning to use the Internet (Klobas & Clyde, 2000), and Internet purchases (George, 2002). However, Liao et al. (1999) did not find support for the theory of planned behavior and research studies by Randall and Gibson (1991), Beck and Aizen (1991) and Kurland (1995) found only weak support. These studies thus show rather mixed and confusing results.
Technology Aacceptance Model (TAM)
The technology acceptance model (TAM) is a theoretical model that evaluates "? the effect of system characteristics on user acceptance of computer-based information systems" (Davis, 1986). In a similar fashion to the theory of reasoned action, TAM assumes that a computer user is generally quite rational and uses information in a systematic manner to decide whether to use, or not to use this technology in the workplace. The main goal of TAM was:
... to provide an explanation of the determinants of computer acceptance that is general, and capable of explaining user behavior across a broad range of end-user computing technologies and user populations, while at the same time being both parsimonious and theoretically justified. (Davis et al., 1989)
In attempting to fulfill this aim, Davis' (1986) conceptual framework proposed that a user's motivational factors are related to actual technology usage and hence, act as a bridge between technology design (e.g., system features and capabilities) and actual technology usage. This means that information obtained from the prediction of actual usage at the early stage will guide designers and implementers to enhance the chance of implementing technology successfully or even avoid the risk of failure. In the conceptual framework Davis (1986) assumes that stimulus variables (e.g., system features and capabilities) trigger organism factors (e.g., user motivation to use the technology) and in turn, users respond by actually using the technology. Davis identified three major determinants of technology acceptance (or adoption) suggested by previous research studies that relate to cognition and effectiveness. He began with the theory of reasoned action (Ajzen & Fishbein, 1980; Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975) and adapted this as a basis for causal links between perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, attitude toward using technology, and behavioral intention to explain technology adoption.
Benefits claimed for the use of TAM are twofold: (1) it provides IS designers with information about how and where to modify design to enhance IS acceptance and (2) it provides IS implementers with information about how and where to manage IS implementation.
Many studies (e.g., Davis, 1989; Segars & Grover, 1993; Taylor & Todd, 1995b) have examined TAM across various technologies and have found TAM to be a reliable and valid model for predicting and explaining technology adoption or acceptance behavior. Various studies utilized TAM to assess users' acceptance or rejection of various computer technologies such as microcomputers (Igbaria, Guimaraes, & Davis, 1995), DOS and Windows (Speier, Morris, & Bridggs, 1995), word processing software (Adams, Nelson, & Todd, 1992; Davis et al., 1989; Davis & Venkatesh, 1996; Hendrickson & Collins, 1996; Venkatesh & Davis, 1996), spreadsheets (Mathieson, 1991), groupware (Taylor & Todd, 1995a), database management systems (Szajna, 1994), e-mail (Adams et al., 1992; Davis, 1989; Szajna, 1996), and the World Wide Web (Lederer, Maupin, Sena, & Zhuang, 2000). Other studies extended TAM by including other variables such as perceived credibility (Wang, Wang, Lin, & Tang, 2003), gender difference (Gefen & Straub, 1997), and enjoyment (Al-Gahtani & King, 1999). In summary, although several authors (Davis et al., 1989; Venkatesh & Davis, 2000) assert that TAM is a useful model for predicting user technology adoption behavior, the stud?ies showed mixed results. Moreover, most of these studies concentrated on the fundamental prescriptions of TAM with the exception of the study by Wang et al. (2003) which included perceived credibility.
Diffusion of Innovations
The theory of diffusion of innovations as described by Rogers (1995) is well known. Rogers describes diffusion of innovations as:
... the process by which an innovation is communicated through certain channels over time among the members of social systems. It is a special type of communication, in that the messages are concerned with new ideas. (Rogers, 1995)
In the diffusion process, Rogers stresses the importance of communication in an attempt to educate the customer about the innovation concerned. He identifies four main elements: an innovation, communication channels, time, and the social system. Rogers suggests that consumers' reactions to the innovation can be measured based on how an innovation is different, how well it is communicated, how long it takes to persuade customers to adopt it, and whether the social system is structured towards achieving a common goal. According to Rogers the four elements of the diffusion of innovation provide an indication of how an innovation is passed to the consumer from first knowledge of this innovation to its final adoption or rejection. The adoption decision for an innovation such as Internet technology in the banking industry is defined as:
... the process through which an individual (or other decision-making unit) passes from first knowledge of an innovation to forming an attitude toward the innovation, to a decision to adopt or reject, to implementation and use of the new idea, and to confirmation of this decision . (Rogers, 1995).
A decision not to adopt an innovation relates to the rejection of the available new idea. However, in order to explain the rate of adoption of innovations, Rogers suggests measurement of the following perceived characteristics of innovations: (1) relative advantage, (2) compatibility, (3) complexity, (4) trialability, and (5) observability. Rogers (1995) postulated that the adoption of innovations is influenced by these five characteristics, and that they can explain the rate of technology adoption.
Developing a Framework for this Study
This study involved an exploratory investigation of Internet technology adoption in the Omani banking industry, informed by the situation in the Australia. The various technology adoption models described suggest that a number of factors might affect adoption. Relative advantage and ease of use, suggested by Moore and Benbasat (1991), were firstly considered in the analysis. Rogers (1995) originally identified these two perceptions of technology adoption as relative advantage and complexity. Moore and Benbasat (1991) and Taylor and Todd (1995b) explained that these two constructs are similar to those of TAM (Davis, 1986). They highlighted the fact that relative advantage is similar to the perceived usefulness construct and perceived complexity is similar to perceived ease of use, due to the similarity in their definitions and in the operation of their measurements. Two additional perceptions, organizational performance and customer/organizational relationship, not previously identified in the ICT literature, were also considered. From an analysis of this literature, and from some preliminary discussions with bank managers, a theoretical framework was devised that suggests that bank managers' perceptions of only four adoption factors:
* Relative Advantage
* Organizational Performance
* Customer/Organizational Relationship
* Ease of Use
might affect any decision to adopt Internet technology in the banking industry. The results of the study, specifically investigating the major enablers and inhibitors of Internet technology adoption in the banking industry in Oman, suggest that these four adoption factors do indeed provide a useful explanation of this adoption.
RESEARCH METHOD
The Australian banking industry was considered in this investigation because of the advanced development of its Internet technology adoption. By examining Internet technology adoption in the banking industry of a developing country in relation to a developed country, the study hoped to provide a richer understanding of the industry and to enrich the analysis of how to improve Internet technology adoption in the banking industry in Oman. Twenty-seven interviews were conducted with strategic, tactical, and operational managers at each of nine major banks, five in Oman (Bank of Dhofar, Oman Arab Bank, Oman International Bank, and National Bank of Oman) and four in Australia (National Australia Bank, WestPac, Commonwealth Bank, and Australia New Zealand Bank).
Selection of interviewees was made from available and willing bank officers so that roughly equal number from each management group were considered. A significant difficulty was encountered in arranging interviews with Australian bankers, but eventually some bank officers of appropriate standing did agree to participate and gave willing of their time, however, several hoped for interviews did not eventuate thus restricting the depth of the information gathered about some Australian banks. Given the exploratory nature of this investigation, data was gathered through semi-structured interviews with these managers, and available internal and public reports were used to facilitate understanding and to explore Internet technology adoption. Interview questions were devised to cover the issues identified from the literature and the research framework. Statements by participants are very important sources of evidence, and interviews were thus tape-recorded for later analysis. The average interview time was around 35 minutes.
A schedule of semi-structured interviews with these managers was set up to gather field evidence of perceptions of the four adoption factors: relative advantage, organizational performance, customer/organizational relationship, and ease of use. Interviews were based on issues identified from the literature to explore in-depth the major enablers and inhibitors of Internet technology adoption in the banking industries of Oman and Australia. The four interview factors are further described:
Perceived Rrelative Advantage
Discussion here concentrated on the extent to which a manager perceives that Internet technology would enable their organization to gain relative advantage in the industry. From NVIVO analysis of the interviews, issues related to perceived relative advantage were identified as: convenience of services, innovation of ideas, and management of services.
Perceived Organizational Performance
This explored the extent to which a manager perceives that Internet technology could improve organizational performance in the industry. Clearly, if an organization expects to improve its performance with Internet technology then the likelihood of their adopting it will be greater. From NVIVO analysis of the interviews, perceived organizational performance related issues were: profitability, market environment, and employees' productivity.
Perceived Customer/ Organizational Relationship
Here the discussion emphasized the extent to which a manager perceives that Internet technology would improve their organization's relationship with customers. If an organization perceives that Internet technology can improve its relationship with its customers then the likelihood of their adopting it will be higher. From the literature it was possible to identify focused issues as: customer trust, customer commitment, and customer satisfaction.
Perceived Eease of Use
If a bank officer perceives that Internet technology is easy to use then they will most likely be motivated to adopt this technology. The issues identified here by NVIVO analysis of the interviews include: easy to navigate, easy to learn, and easy to manage.
Analysis of Data
The elaborated responses from the 27 managers were analyzed and the findings reported according to suggestions for data reduction and display offered by various authors (Miles & Huberman, 1994; Strauss & Corbin, 1990). NVIVO (version 2) qualitative research software was utilized in analyzing the data. Specifically, NVIVO assisted the analysis in both reducing (organizing and sorting) and displaying the evidence (creation of thematic conceptual tables) in a way that made it easier to see. A case-by-case matrix display was prepared using NVIVO to compare participants' perceptions on various issues. A thematic conceptual matrix display was then produced to compare and identify similar or different patterns of concerns within both banking industries to facilitate understanding of Internet technology adoption. Another thematic conceptual matrix display was produced to compare and identify similar or different concerns within different levels of management (strategic, tactical, and operational). From the analysis it was possible to:
* Identify major patterns to facilitate in-depth understanding of Internet technology adoption
* Reduce the data through the process of generating categories and establishing links (e.g., open and axial coding) as suggested by Strauss and Corbin (1990), using a grounded theory approach where a code is attached to a segment of text and then links between the coded data are explored.
* Display thematic conceptual tables to compare issues within a case and across cases.
* Identify patterns that facilitate understand?ing and lead to useful conclusions.
MAJOR FINDINGS OF THE STUDY
The study found that Omani bank managers' perceptions of four issues, namely:
* Perceived relative advantage
* Perceived ease of use
* Perceived organizational performance
* Perceived customer/organizational relationship
jointly provided a broader understanding of Internet technology adoption in the banking industry than that proposed by previous theories and models including the theory of reasoned action, the theory of planned behavior, the technology acceptance model, and the theory of innovation diffusion.
The Omani and Australian banking industries were both found to perceive that Internet technology was important and that it could enable the industry to gain relative advantage. In relation to perceived relative advantage, the enablers of Internet technology adoption found in both the Omani and Australian banking industry include items found in Table 2.
A number of authors (e.g., Dedrick, Gurbaxani, & Kraemer, 2003; King & Teo, 1996) have argued from a theoretical perspective, that it is possible to increase the rate of Internet technology adoption if a manager perceives that organizational performance could be improved. The study showed that in the Omani banking industry, the majority of managers' responses indicated that this was indeed the case. Specifically, it was found that perceived improvement in productivity of employees (e.g., improvement in business efficiency) could increase the rate of adoption. On the other hand, perceived problems in profitability, such as technology investment cost and the need for economies of scale for Internet technology use, could inhibit the banking industry from adopting Internet technology. The majority of the respondents in the Australian banking industry also suggested that perceived organizational performance was associated with Internet technology adoption. However, Australian managers expect to face a problem in the market environment in the difficulty of expanding their customer base. One reason for this is that the Australian banking industry is now facing intensive competition (Ramsey & Smith, 1999; Sathye, 1999). Moreover, major Australian banks have already adopted Internet technology as a strategic tool to expand their markets and offer the same services online, making it harder for others to differentiate their offerings. So the real challenge here is how banks will be able to expand their market on the Internet. Table 3 shows the major enablers and inhibitors of Internet technology adoption in relation to perceived organizational performance.
The role of perceived customer/organizational relationship in IT adoption has attracted considerable attention in the literature (Anderson & Srinivasan, 2003; Athanassopoulos, 2000; Sathye, 1999). In this study, participants were asked whether or not they perceived that Internet technology adoption could improve the relationship with their customers in relation to three focused issues identified in the literature: customer trust, customer commitment, and customer satisfaction. Results of the study suggests that the decision to adopt Internet technology is indeed based on what managers perceive about the customer/organizational relationship in the banking industry.
Omani managers expect to satisfy their customers, but this creates several challenges including: customer trust (e.g., Internet security) and customer commitment (e.g., customer loyalty). Most respondents did not think that Internet technology adoption could improve their customers' trust, as they thought that their customers feared that their privacy might be invaded on the Internet. They also did not think that Internet technology could improve their customers' commitment as this related to a close personal relationship with bank branches. This finding has implications for the way banks conduct their business as they have the option of conducting banking business either on the basis of pure Internet banking or using branches and the Internet.
In the semi-structured interviews, participants were asked whether or not they believed that Internet technology was easy to use in the context of the banking industry. The literature identified three major issues: easy to navigate, easy to learn, and easy to manage. The findings of this study suggest that the decision to adopt Internet technology is consistent with the literature and that managers' perceptions about ease of use are very important. Australian managers perceived no difficulties in using Internet technology whereas their Omani counterparts saw some difficulty in navigating on the Internet. They highlighted part of this difficulty as lack of awareness and knowledge about Internet technology and the accessibility of services. These findings suggest that the Omani banking industry faces a major challenge in using the Internet. Al-Wohaibi, Masoud, and Edwards (2002) claim that human resource deficiency is a major problem in Oman, however, Abdul-Ghadir and Kozar (1995) argued that computer knowledge, experience, and educational level would contribute to the process of increasing the rate of Internet adoption in the Gulf countries. Other authors (Davis & Venkatesh, 1996; Venkatesh, 1999) have suggested that it would be more beneficial to focus on training rather than on system design.
DISCUSSION: IMPLICATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR OoMANI BANKS
The banks that stay behind will not be able to embrace Internet technology and the benefits it is claimed to bring and hence will not be able to compete in the industry or in international markets (Porter, 2001). This will also have consequences on the economy. For example, the Omani economy will not improve if banks stay behind, meaning that Internet technology is an important tool in the new economy and should not be ignored. The findings of this study have practical implications for Internet technology adoption in the Omani banking industry and we offer some guidelines.
Perceived Organizational Performance
The major inhibiting concern here is profitability. This concern relates to high technology investment cost and the need for economies of scale for Internet technology use.
Implications
Internet technology adoption has major implications on banks' performance and hence the economy, and could affect the marketing mix in industry (Al-Hajri, 2005; Kettinger, Grover, Guha, & Segars, 1994). The privatization of the Oman Telecommunication Company (Omantel) is a good forward step, allowing Omantel to play a role in the economy. This means that the banking industry can also expect changes such as improvement in telecommunication services, the expansion of telecommunication services, quality of delivery in telecommunication services, and lower cost of delivering the service (Oman Telecommunication Company, 2002). Of course the change in telecommunication services will have positive implications on the growth of the Internet population as well as on the geographical distribution of Internet services. In addition, it is expected that the number of Internet cafés will grow, in addition to home and business Internet use. Moreover, the development of an Internet village is expected to offer awareness of Internet technology in the region and e-government is also expected to play a major role in e-payment as it expands. Improvement in telecommunication infrastructure and services, Internet village, and e-government will have positive implication on the economic scale of Internet use and the cost of offering Internet banking services. This suggests that banks should be motivated to invest more in Internet technology (Molla & Licker, 2005).
Recommendations
To reduce this inhibiting factor, King and Teo (1996) suggested a focus on economies of scale for Internet technology use. However, others (Lavender, 2004; Reichheld & Schefter, 2000) argued that most ICT decision-makers ignore intangible cost/benefits. Thus, the Omani banking industry ought to consider intangible cost/benefits in their ICT decisions.
Perceived Customer/ Organizational Relationship
For this factor, the major inhibiting concerns are customers trust (e.g., Internet security) and customer commitment (e.g., customer loyalty).
Implications
Internet technology adoption has the potential to affect the relationship between customers and banks: it could improve or destroy this relationship.
Recommendations
To improve customer/bank relationships, the banks ought to consider reducing factors inhibiting improvement in the relationship. For example, Whitman (2004) argued that people lack understanding of threats to information security and others (Gefen, 2002; Khalfan, 2004; Mukherjee & Neth, 2003) reported that Internet security was a major concern in trusting the Internet. Therefore, the Omani banking industry needs to continually address Internet security concerns through learning, making backups, and implementing secure systems, databases, and networks (Held & Bowers, 2001). On the other hand, some authors (Julian & Ramaseshan, 1994; Reichheld & Schefter, 2000; Vatanasombut, Stylianou, & Igbaria, 2004) mentioned that it is hard to win customer loyalty on the Internet so the Oman banking industry will need to focus on continually creating values as well as having a long-term plan.
Perceived Eease of Use
The major inhibiting concern here is ease of navigation on the Internet (e.g., lack of awareness/ knowledge about Internet technology and accessibility of service).
Implications
Successful adoption of ICT depends on how easy it is for people to use it (Davis et al., 1989; Moore & Benbasat, 1991; Taylor & Todd, 1995b).
Recommendations
To reduce these inhibiting concerns, Venkatesh and Davis (1996), Davis and Venkatesh (2004), and Abdul-Gader and Kozar (1995) suggest that training could improve awareness/knowledge about Internet technology and hence increase favorable perceptions about ease of use. On the other hand, Karahanna and Limayem (2000) suggested that users should have both physical and informational access to the ICT. To ensure this, customers of Omani banks need to address the issue of Internet navigation with telecom?munication companies.
Al-Wohaibi et al. (2002) suggested that Omani government organizations need to focus on the development of ICT awareness in schools and universities if they want to increase the rate of successful ICT implementation. They also suggested that banking should consider IT training in its strategic plan as well as supporting it financially to make it work. Consistent with Al-Wohaibi et al. (2002), these suggestions have two important benefits. One is that the Omani banks would be able to develop Internet technology/bank services awareness smoothly when they introduce it to their customers in the industry through a series of seminars, training, online manuals, and online support without having to invest a lot of money to train and educate their customers. The second benefit would be that Omani banks would also be able to educate their employees through a series of technical seminars and short-term courses to advance their employees' skills so that they could support their Internet technology infrastructure.
CONCLUSION
This study has shown that analysis of four perceptions of managers in the banking industry: relative advantage, ease of use, organizational performance, and customer/organizational relationship, can shed light on the reasons for adoption (or non-adoption) of Internet technology. As expected, the findings confirm that Australian managers perceived less inhibitors to the introduction and implementation of Internet technology than Omani managers, meaning that the Australian banking industry has less challenges to confront than that of Oman.
It has revealed that despite cultural differences, there are many similarities in the attitude to technology adoption in the banking systems of the two countries. Bankers in both countries see the use of Internet technologies as offering advantages including: convenience of available service and location, being able to rapidly develop innovative ideas, and the ease with which requests and complaints could be followed up. Both saw ease of learning to use this technology, improvements in productivity of bank employees, and customer satisfaction as important enabling factors. Omani and Australian banks each saw issues of customer trust relating to privacy and Internet security as inhibitors to use of Internet technologies.
There were also, however, some important differences. While profitability was regarded as an enabler by Australian banks, which had already installed this technology, it was regarded as an inhibitor by the Omani banks due to the high cost of setting this up. Customer commitment (loyalty) was seen as an enabler to use of the Internet by Australian banks but as an inhibitor in Oman, where bank customers still appreciate the personal attention available in local bank branches. Finally, with their greater experience in using computers and the Internet, Australian banks found the services easy to use, easy to navigate, and quite accessible. In Oman, however, where such experience was lacking, issues of Internet navigation were seen as an inhibiting factor to use of the technology.
This study should provide useful information to the banking industry in Oman to assist it with decisions regarding the adoption of Internet technology. A report provided to Omani bank managers will make them more aware of the problems of technology adoption and of recommendations to take action to improve their competitive position in the global market.
Sidebar
Table 2. Enablers relating to the factor of perceived relative advantage
Major enablers in both Oman and Australia
Convenience of services (convenience of available service and convenience of location)
Innovation of ideas (rapid development of innovative ideas)
Management of services (easy to follow up requests/complains)
References
REFERENCES
Abdul-Gader, K., & Kozar, K. A. (1995). The impact of computer alienation on information technology investment decisions: An exploratory cross-national analysis. MIS Quarterly, 19(4), 535-559.
Adams, D., Nelson, R., & Todd, P. (1992). Perceived usefulness, ease of use, and usage of information technology: A replication. MIS Quarterly, 16(2), 227-247.
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 50(2), 179-211.
Ajzen, I., & Driver, B. (1992). Application of the theory of planned behaviour to leisure choice. Journal of Leisure Research, 24(3), 207-224.
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1980). Understanding attitudes and predicting social behavior. London: Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs.
Ajzen, I., & Madden, T. (1986). Prediction of goal-directed behavior: Attitudes, intentions, and perceived behavioral control. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 22, 453-474.
Al-Gahtani, S., & King, M. (1999). Attitudes, satisfaction and usage: Factors contributing to each in the acceptance of information technology. Behaviour and Information Technology, 18(4), 277-297.
Al-Hajri, S. (2005). Internet technology adoption in the banking industry. Melbourne: Victoria University.
Al-Wohaibi, M., Masoud, F., & Edwards, H. (2002). Fundamental risk factors in deploying IT/IS projects in Omani government organisations. Journal of Global Information Management, 10(4), 1-22.
Anderson, R., & Srinivasan, S. (2003). E-satisfaction and e-loyalty: A contingency framework. Psychology and Marketing, 20(2), 123-138.
Athanassopoulos, A. (2000). Customer satisfaction cues to support market segmentation and explain switching behavior. Journal of Business Research (Bangladesh), 47, 191-207.
Ayadi, A. (2007). Business challenges of online banking portals. In A. Tatnall (Ed.), Encyclopaedia of portal technology and applications (Vol. 1, pp. 102-105). Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference.
Bagozzi, R., Davis, F., & Warshaw, P. (1992). Development and test of a theory of technological learning and usage. Human Relations, 45(7), 659-670.
Bagozzi, R., Wong, N., Abe, S., & Bergami, M. (2000). Cultural and situational contingencies and the theory of reasoned action: Application to fast food restaurant consumption. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 9(2), 97-106.
Basant, R., Commander, S. J., Harrison, R., & Menezes-Filho, N. (2006). ICT adoption and productivity in developing countries: New firm level evidence from Brazil and India (IZA Discussion Paper No. 2294).
Beck, L., & Ajzen, I. (1991). Predicting dishonest actions using the theory of planned behavior. Journal of Research in Personality, 25(3), 285-301.
Bobbitt, L., & Dabholkar, P. (2001). Integrating attitudinal theories to understand and predict use of technology-based self-service: The Internet as an illustration. International Journal of Service Industry Management, 12(5), 423-450.
Bonfield, E. (1974). Attitude, social influence, personal norm and intentions as related to brand purchase behavior. Journal of Marketing Research, 11(Nov), 379-389.
Chang, M. (1998). Predicting unethical behavior: A comparison of the theory of reasoned action and the theory of planned behavior. Journal of Business Ethics, 17, 1825-1834.
Clark, J., & Soliman, F. (1999). A graphical method for assessing knowledge-based systems investments. Logistics Information Management, 12(1-2), 63-77.
Davis, F. D. (1986). A technology acceptance model for empirically testing new end-user information systems: Theory and results. Boston: MIT.
Davis, F. D. (1989). Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of information technology. MIS Quarterly, 10(3), 318-340.
Davis, F. D., Bagozzi, R., & Warshaw, P. (1989). User acceptance of computer technology: A comparison of two theoretical models. Management Science, 35(8), 982-1003.
Davis, F. D., & Venkatesh, V. (1996). A critical assessment of potential measurement biases in the technology acceptance model: Three experiments. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 45(1), 19-45.
Davis, F. D., & Venkatesh, V. (2004). Toward preprototype user acceptance testing of new information systems: Implications for software project management. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 51(1), 31-46.
Dedrick, J., Gurbaxani, V., & Kraemer, K. (2003). Information technology and economic performance: A critical review of the empirical evidence. ACM Computer Surveys, 35(1), 1-28.
East, R. (1993). Investment decisions and theory of planned behaviour. Journal of Economic Psychology, 14, 337-375.
Engel, J., Blackwell, R., & Miniard, P. (1995). Consumer behaviour (8th ed.). Fort Worth, Texas: Dryden Press.
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, attitude, intention, and behavior: An introduction to theory and research. Reading: Addison-Wesley.
Gefen, D. (2002). Customer loyalty in e-commerce. Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 3(2), 27-51.
Gefen, D., & Straub, D. (1997). Gender differences in perception and adoption of e-mail: An extention to the technology acceptance model. MIS Quarterly, 21(4), 389-400.
George, J. (2002). Influences on the intent to make Internet purchases. Internet Research: Electronic Networking Applications and Policy, 12(2), 165-180.
Ghosh, S. (1998). Making business sense of the Internet. Harvard Business Review, March-April, 126-133.
Gibson, A., & Frakes, A. (1997). Truth or consequences: A study of critical issues and decision making in accounting. Journal of Business Ethics, 16, 161-171.
Goldenhar, L., & Connell, C. (1993). Understanding and predicting recycling behavior: An application of the theory of reasoned action. Journal of Environmental Systems, 22, 91-103.
Harrell, G., & Bennett, P. (1974). An evaluation of the expectancy value model of attitude measurement for physician prescribing behavior. Journal of Marketing Research, 11(3), 269-278.
Harrison, D., Mykytyn, P., & Riemenschneider, C. (1997). Executive decisions about adoption of information technology in small business: Theory and empirical tests. Information Systems Research, 8(2), 171-195.
Held, J., & Bowers, J. (2001). Securing e-business applications and communications. Boca Raton, FL: Auerbach.
Hendrickson, A., & Collins, M. (1996). An assessment of structure and causation of IS usage. The DATABASE for Advances in Information Systems, 27(2), 61-67.
Igbaria, M., Guimaraes, T., & Davis, G. (1995). Determinants of microcomputer usage via a structural equation model. Journal of Management Information Systems, 11(4), 87-114.
Julian, C., & Ramaseshan, B. (1994). The role of customer-contact personnel in the marketing of a retail bank's services. International Journal of Retail and Distribution Management, 22(5), 29-34.
Kalakota, R., & Whinston, A. (1997). Electronic commerce: A manager's guide. Reading, Mass: Addison-Wesley.
Karahanna, E., & Limayem, M. (2000). E-mail and v-mail usage: Generalizing across technologies. Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce, 10(1), 49-66.
Karahanna, E., Straub, D., & Cherveny, N. (1999). Information technology adoption across time: A cross-sectional comparison of pre-adoption and post-adoption believes. MIS Quarterly, 23(2), 192-213.
Kettinger, W., Grover, V., Guha, S., & Segars, A. (1994). Strategic systems revisited: A study in sustainability and performance. MIS Quarterly, 18(1), 31-58.
Khalfan, A. (2004). Information security consider?ations in IS/IT outsourcing projects: A descriptive case study of two sectors. International journal of Information Management, 24(1), 29-42.
King, W., & Teo, T. (1996). Key dimensions of facilitators and inhibitors for the strategic use of information technology. Journal of Management Information Systems, 12(4), 35-53.
Klobas, J., & Clyde, L. (2000). Adults learning to use the Internet: A longitudinal study of attitudes and other factors associated with intended Internet use. Library and Information Science Research, 22(1), 5-34.
Kurland, N. (1995). Ethical intentions and the theories of reasoned action and planned behavior. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 25(4), 297-313.
Lavender, M. (2004). Maximizing customer relationships and minimizing business risk. The International Journal of Bank Marketing, 22(4), 291-296.
Lederer, A., Maupin, D., Sena, M., & Zhuang, Y. (2000). The role of ease of use, usefulness and attitude in the prediction of World Wide Web usage. Paper presented at the ACM SIGCPR Conference on Computer Personnel Research, Boston, MA.
Lee, D. R. (2005). Agricultural sustainability and technology adoption: Issues and policies for developing countries American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 87(5), 1325-1334.
Liao, S., Shao, Y., Wang, H., & Chen, A. (1999). The adoption of virtual banking: An empirical study. International Journal of Information Management, 19(1), 63-74.
Loch, K., & Conger, S. (1996). Evaluating ethical decision making and computer use. Communications of the ACM, 39(7), 77-83.
Locke, E., Fredrick, E., Lee, C., & Bobko, P. (1984). Effect of self-efficacy, goals, and task strategies on task performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 69(2), 241-251.
Mathieson, K. (1991). Predicting user intentions: Comparing the technology acceptance model with the theory of planned behavior. Information Systems Research, 2(3), 173-191.
Michelsen, H., & Hartwich, F. (2004). University based agricultural research: A comparative study in Sub-Saharan Africa. Addis Ababa: International Service for National Agricultural Research
Miles, M., & Huberman, A. (1994). Qualitative data analysis: An expanded sourcebook (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.
MISC. (2002). 6 million Internet user registration milestone reached, after 1st quarter, as banking usage (transactions) grow 15% in latest quarter. Retrieved December 17, 2004, from www.marketintelligence.com.au
Molla, A., & Licker, P. S. (2005). E-commerce adoption in developing countries : a model and instrument. Information and Management, 42(6), 877-899.
Montealegre, R. (1999). A temporal model of institutional interventions for information technology adoption in less-developed countries. Journal of Management Information Systems, 16(1), 207-232.
Moore, G., & Benbasat, I. (1991). Development of an instrument to measure the perception of adopting an information technology innovation. Information Systems Research, 2(3), 192-222.
Mukherjee, A., & Neth, P. (2003). A model of trust in online relationship banking. International Journal of Bank Marketing, 21(1), 5-15.
Mykytyn, P., & Harison, D. (1993). The application of the theory of reasoned action to senior management and strategic information systems. Information Resources Management Journal, 6(2), 15-25.
Oman Ministry of Development. (1996). Vision for Oman economy (Qaboos bin Said speech, June 2, 1995). Muscat: Ministry of Development.
Oman Telecommunication Company. (2002). Annual book 2002. Muscat: Oman Telecommunication Company.
Paarlberg, R. L. (2003). Technology adoption in developing countries: The case of genetically modified crops. Retrieved April 2007, from http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/cia/nic2020/technology_adop?tion_nov6.pdf
Porter, M. (2001). Strategy and the Internet. Harvard Business Review, March, 63-78.
Raisinghani, M. (2000). Electronic commerce at the down of the third millennium-electronic commerce: Opportunities and challenges. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.
Rajapakse, J., & Seddon, P. B. (2007). ERP adoption in developing countries in Asia: A cultural misfit (Unpublished Working Paper). University of Melbourne.
Ramsey, J., & Smith, M. (1999). Managing customer channel usage in the Australian banking sector. Managerial Auditing Journal, 14(7), 329-338.
Randall, D., & Gibson, A. (1991). Ethical decision making in the medical profession: An application of the theory of planned behavior. Journal of Business Ethics, 10(2), 111-122.
Reichheld, F., & Schefter, P. (2000). E-loyalty: Your secret weapon on the Web. Harvard Business Review, 78(4), 105-113.
Rogers, E. M. (1995). Diffusion of innovations (4th ed.). New York: The Free Press.
Sathye, M. (1999). Adoption of Internet banking by Australian consumers: An empirical investigation. International Journal of Bank Marketing, 17(7), 324-334.
Segars, A., & Grover, V. (1993). Re-examining perceived ease of use and usefulness: A confirmatory factor analysis. MIS Quarterly, 17(4), 517-525.
Shifter, D., & Ajzen, I. (1985). Intention, perceived control and weight loss: An application of the theory planned behaviour. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 843-851.
Shimp, T., & Kavas, A. (1984). The theory of reasoned action applied to coupon usage. Journal of Consumer Research, 11(Dec), 795-809.
Sparks, P., & Shepherd, R. (1992). Self-identity and the theory of planned behaviour: Assessing the role of identification with green consumerism. Social Psychology Quarterly, 55(4), 388-399.
Speier, C., Morris, M., & Bridggs, C. (1995). Attitudes toward computers: The impact of performance. Paper presented at the AIS, Pittsburgh, PA.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and techniques. Newbury Park: Sage Publications.
Szajna, B. (1994). Software evaluation and choice: Predictive validation of the technology acceptance instrument. MIS Quarterly, 18(3), 319-324.
Szajna, B. (1996). Empirical evaluation of the revised technology acceptance model. Management Science, 42(1), 85-94.
Talukdar, D., Sudhir, K., & Ainslie, A. S. (2006). Investigating new product diffusion across products and countries (Unpublished Working Paper-Yale SOM Working Paper No. MK-06).
Taylor, S., & Todd, P. (1995a). Assessing IT usage: The role of prior experience. MIS Quarterly, 19(4), 561-570.
Taylor, S., & Todd, P. (1995b). Understanding information technology usage: A yest of competing models. Information Systems Research, 6(2), 144-176.
Taylor, S., & Todd, P. (1997). Understanding the determinants of consumer composting behavior. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 27(7), 602-628.
Thomson, K., Haziris, N., & Alekos, P. (1994). Attitudes and food consumption. British Food Journal, 96(11), 9-14.
Vallerand, R., Pelletier, L., Deshaies, P., Cuerrier, J., & Mongeau, C. (1992). Ajzen and Fishbein's theory of reasoned action as applied to moral behavior: A confirmatory analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62(1), 98-109.
Vatanasombut, B., Stylianou, A., & Igbaria, M. (2004). How to retain online customers. Communications of the ACM, 47(6), 65-69.
Venkatesh, V. (1999). Creation of favorable user perceptions: Exploring the role of intrinsic motivation. MIS Quarterly, 23(2), 239-260.
Venkatesh, V., & Davis, F. (1996). A model of the antecedence of perceived ease of use: Development and test. Decision Science, 27(3), 451-481.
Venkatesh, V., & Davis, F. (2000). A theoretical extension of the technology acceptance model: Four longitudinal field studies. Management Science, 46(2), 186-204.
Wang, Y., Wang, Y., Lin, H., & Tang, T. (2003). Determinants of user acceptance of Internet banking: An empirical study. International Journal of Service Industry Management, 14(5), 501-519.
Warshaw, P., & Davis, F. (1985). Disentangling behavior intention and behavioral expectation. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 21, 213-218.
Whitman, M. (2004). In defence of the realm: Understanding the threats to information security. International Journal of Information Management, 24, 43-57.
Wright, A., & Ralston, D. (2002). The lagging development of small business Internet banking in Australia. Journal of Small Business Management, 40(1), 51-57.
AuthorAffiliation
Salim Al-Hajri, Higher College of Technology, Oman
Arthur Tatnall, Victoria University, Australia
AuthorAffiliation
Salim Al-Hajri is a senior lecturer in the Faculty of Business Studies at Higher College of Technology in Muscat, Oman. His PhD study is about Internet technology adoption in the banking industry. In his study he investigated the enablers and inhibitors of Internet technology adoption in the Omani banking industry and compared them with those in the Australian banking industry. His research interest area includes e commerce, management of information systems, and technological innovation. He has participated and presented few papers in various conferences locally and internationally. Currently he is working towards publishing papers.
Arthur Tatnall is an associate professor in the Graduate School of Business at Victoria University in Melbourne, Australia. His PhD involved a study in curriculum innovation in which he investigated the manner in which Visual Basic entered the curriculum of an Australian university. His research interests include technological innovation, history of technology, information technology in educational management, in?formation systems curriculum, project management and electronic commerce. He has published numerous books, book chapters, journal articles and conference papers, and recently edited the Encyclopaedia of Portal Technology and Applications for IGI Global. He is also strongly involved in the work of IFIP.
Word count: 8467
Copyright IGI Global Jul-Sep 2008

