Cypriot parental perceptions of children's internet usage: An investigation of motivations and barriers
Wen-Ling, Liu; Kitchen, PhilipAuthor Information; Argyris Moskovos. EuroMed Journal of Business; Bingley Vol. 4, Iss. 3, (2009): 304-323.

	•	Full text
	•	Full text - PDF
	•	Abstract/Details
Hide highlighting
Abstract
TranslateAbstract
Purpose - The purpose of this paper is to examine parental perceptions of the impact of children's internet usage in the Republic of Cyprus. Design/methodology/approach - The measures for the survey are synthesized from the existing literature. The paper looks at how Cypriot parents' attitudes lead them to empower their children's use of the internet. It also explores whether parental attitudes act as an obstacle in restraining children's usage of the internet, and their rationales. Findings - The research findings highlight the importance of children's internet protection in relation to the role of parents. Apart from virus concerns and governmental promotions strategies as main barriers to children's internet usage, the engaged family time is found as a unique barrier to retard internetadoption in Cyprus. Research limitations/implications - One of the limitations of this paper is that the data are limited by use of non-probability quota sampling with only the views of parents, which may limit the generalization of the results. Originality/value - The paper contributes to the marketing literature on children internet usage and the roles of parents and governmental promotion strategies related to internet adoption.
Full Text
	•	TranslateFull text
	•	Turn on search term navigation
Corporate and Marketing Communications: Development and Challenges
Edited by Ioanna Papasolomou and Alkis Thrassou
Introduction
The rapid adoption of the internet has had a tremendous impact on the media landscape and the way that organizations communicate with the marketplace. Partly because of consumers' desire for information, as well as for control over the information they receive, internet usage is increasingly steadily around the world ([62] Nuttall, 2005; [64] Pike and Brynko, 2005; [73] ( The ) Economist , 2006; [74] Weekes, 2005). Research carried out by the City University of New York indicates that home computer access can be beneficial and that childhood and family life are becoming ever more digitalized ([72] Tally, 2006). Not only does the internet perform a multifaceted marketing function, but also it is a versatile learning medium in relation to children's activities and development. This paper investigates Cypriot parental perceptions of children's internet usage and examines the factors that retard parental adoption of the internet, in order to encourage greater internet usage in Cyprus and potentially influence public policy for the Cypriot government and Cypriot parents to support the internet for educational purposes.
Background of the Republic of Cyprus
The internet
According to the [44] Internet World Statistics, Usage and Population Statistics (IWS, 2006c), the highest number of internet users is found in the USA with 20.1 percent of worldwide internet usage, followed by China (10.9 percent), Japan (8.4 percent), and India (5 percent), respectively, whereas the European Union (EU) in total (29 countries) accounts for 22.5 percent of usage. In the Republic of Cyprus (Cyprus) - a recent EU accession country - the number of internet users has increased dramatically since the country joined the EU in 2004; and internet usage has grown at almost the same rate as the rest of the EU. Although 31 percent of the Cypriot population used the internet in 2006, Cyprus has one of the lowest levels of internet usage in the EU at just 0.1 percent ([25] Eurobarometer, 2004; [45] IWS, 2006b).
Across the world, the internet use as a means of communicating with specific audiences has become an essential aspect of contemporary marketing communications, the implications of its future development on the print, broadcast, and advertising industries are of great interest to society. According to the Information and Communication Technologies Usage by Individuals ' Annual Survey in 2005 ([12] CYSTAT, 2005), individuals aged 16-74 using a computer in the last 12 months has remained roughly the same (43 percent) since 2004, and the individuals' daily computer usage (70 percent) has generally stayed the same as well. Similar results were found in individual's internet usage (33 percent) and daily internet access (52 percent) compared to 2005. Most of the individuals accessed the internet at home (70 percent) and work (45 percent). Notably, the use of a personal computer (PC) at places of education - according to this study - was slightly in decline. Moreover, a much larger decline is also evident in those accessing the Net at public places such as airports, public libraries, internet cafes and hotels, which are probably a consequence of more home and office usage as diffusion of innovation accelerates, coupled with high rates for access in hotels and airports. The 2005 Community Survey on Information Computer Technology Usage in 25 EU countries ([19] Demunter, 2006) reports similarly that more than one in two (54 percent) Cypriot residents lack basic computer skills. Demunter's report also highlights educational level as an important influential factor, as only 20 percent of the Cypriot people with a higher educational level have no basic e-skills; this applies to more than 83 percent of Cypriot citizens not educated beyond lower secondary level. Nevertheless, digital literacy is a particular problem for the older generation (88 percent of Cypriot people over 55 years of age lack basic computer skills).
Internet usage in Cyprus from 2003 to 2004 increased enormously, by approximately 60 percent. Although there was a small decline of 2.5 percent in 2006, this seems to have been a temporary phenomenon, and further growth is foreseen in the next three to five years ([43] Infobase Europe, 2006; [46] IWS, 2006a). The huge increase in internet usage may have been related to actions of the state-owned Cyprus Telecommunication Authority (CYTA), who in 2001 reduced their connection fee (now the lowest rate in the EU), via an investment of £24 million Cypriot pounds; the provision of a free information handbook, which in particular, highlights actions that could be taken by schools and parents; and development and updating of various anti-spam/virus services ([22] Donahue, 2005; [32] Flintoff, 2004; [67] Scholastic Inc., 2005). Meanwhile, the use of the internet has also been boosted among businesses and governmental organizations ([26] Europa, 2006). In 2006, one in three persons in Cyprus was using the internet, which overall estimates usage at 31 percent of the Cypriot population; however, the figure is still lower than the 48 percent average usage across the EU ([27] Eurostat, 2006; [43] Infobase Europe, 2006). [12] CYSTAT (2005) reported that the main purpose of internet usage was sending and receiving e-mails and finding information about goods and services, and there was a small rise in the use of such information and in booking holidays; but online shopping was relatively low in comparison. Nonetheless, [4] Christoforou (2006) unsurprisingly reported that 95 percent of children under the age of 13 were enthusiastic about the internet and would like to join chat rooms on the internet, particularly when their parents were not at home.
Cyprus has been subjected to numerous military invasions and occupations and indeed half the Island is still under Turkish rule, as a result of which the island is fragmented, with many ethnic and religious groups with different languages and cultures; consequently, educational quality across the country is variable. The Statistical Service of Cyprus reported that 70 percent of Cypriot adults aged 25-64 on average had at least an upper secondary level of education in 2006 ([13] CYSTAT, 2006), which may indicate that the majority of the population has only a limited understanding or sometimes even erroneous perceptions of the internet and its functions and benefits, when compared to the European norm. However, [63] Phtiaka (1999) stated that even when parents have a undergraduate or postgraduate degree, it might still be difficult for them to deal with their children in non-traditional ways including access to, and use of, the internet.
At the same time, linguistic considerations should not pose an obstacle. Most web sites are in English, because of the American Standard Code for Information Interchange character ([42] IEEE, 2006). However, there is a high level of spoken English in Cyprus, because of the period of British colonization ([21] Dodd, 1993). Now, 71 percent of Cypriots speak English ([23] Education and Training , 2006) and 91 percent of Cypriot children can speak at least one foreign or major Western language such as English, French, German, Italian, or Spanish ([24] Eurobarometer, 2003). The advantage of the English language helps Cyprus to meet European cultural and sociolinguistic needs ([29] Fenyo, 2003). Thus, rapid diffusion of the internet in Cyprus seems to be indubitable.
Children's internet usage
Researchers glowingly claim that the internet offers a better communication medium due to its flexibility and (apparently) superior impact on children's learning ([51] Kraut et al. , 1996; [53] LEA, 2006; [55] Machmias et al. , 2000; [71] Subrahmanyam et al. , 2000). From an educational technologist's viewpoint, the internet offers the potential of incalculable influence on the knowledge, skills, and attitudes of children, which provides an opportunity to help meet the needs of students and teachers nationwide ([6] Clyde, 2005; [28] Fabian, 2001; [33] Fox, 2006; [35] Greene, 2006; [50] Knight and Duyn, 2006). Many studies have told people that children imitate the behavior they witness on televisions and computers, but only the family unit surpasses the media's capacity to communicate values, supply role models and motivates human behavior; thus, parents need to do their part ([22] Donahue, 2005). Nevertheless, a recent study ([14] CYTANET, 2003) showed that Cypriot children tend to imitate their parents' behaviors, actions and expressions and the study indicated children adopt the moral stance and general attitudes of their parents. This suggests that parental attitudes would likely be a significant influence on their children's attitudes toward and usage of the internet.
[51] Kraut et al. (1996) showed that in 41 out of 48 families they interviewed, the heaviest internet users tended to be children. Parents reported in a 1999 survey that children with computer access spent an average of 4 hours 48 minutes per day in front of either a television visual display unit or computer monitor ([71] Subrahmanyam et al. , 2000). Their study also suggested that playing computer games could improve children's visual intelligence skills. A further study examined the characteristics of internet usage among 382 junior high school students in Israel and the findings showed that the internet was used mostly for communication and that boys used the internet more than girls ([55] Machmias et al. , 2000). [20] Dikaiakos's (2006) survey on Cypriot children's internet usage in 2005 indicated that 67 percent of children did not have access to the internet, while of those that did have access; most accessed the internet at home. Notably, 32 percent of parents had not installed filter programs on their PC, 63 percent of parents did not supervise their children's internet usage, and 27 percent of parents did not know where or to whom they should report any perceived illegal or harmful content on the internet. There are many relevant papers on parental perceptions or actual control of children's internet usage([18] Davis, 2003; [36] Guilfoy, 2001; [58] Morgan and Levy, 2002; [75] Welker, 2006); however, little of this work is linked to Cyprus.
Governmental actions
The advent and diffusion of the internet has been accompanied by concerns about harmful, unethical, illegal and undesirable contents, and web sites; in particular, protective action focused on children has raised attention around the world. In a European context, the European Committee has proposed a plan called "Safer Internet Plus" which extended from 2005 to 2008 ([52] Kremmos, 2006). Another form of internet protection is the "Surfcard," which has been tested in various EU schools ([68] Smart Card Online for Filtering Internet (SCOFI), 2002). However, the onus and indeed responsibility for control of internet access and usage for children, continues to rest heavily on parents. In Cyprus, the CYTANET's safe internet form home and schools serves to protect their customers from illegal and harmful internet content as a free facility to CYTANET subscribers - CYTANET is the an internet service provider unit of CYTA, who launched their internet services offering in 1995 and now have a 70 percent market share.
According to [52] Kremmos' (2006)report, Cypriots are or appear to be the least informed parents in Europe on the dangers of the internet in relation to their children. Although the Cypriot government has allocated significant resources to developing children's internet protection ([20] Dikaiakos, 2006), CYTA on World Telecommunication Day (May 17, 2006), who held two seminars on "Cybersecurity for Our Children" to guide parents, teachers, pupils, and its members; had very low physical and virtual attendance ([15] CYTANET, 2006). Further, despite the support from [7] Cyprus's Ministry of Education and Culture, 2006), the results reported a lower level of internet usage at school (24 percent), which nonetheless could increase in the near future as government innovations are more widely communicated and disseminated. It would be beneficial to investigate why schools had such a low rate of internetusage. These factors, taken together, may contribute to the relatively low levels of internet usage among the Cypriot population.
Research objectives
The use of the internet since the 1990s has spread more rapidly than any other innovation in the history of humankind. Global internetaccess reached 1,407 million people in November 2007 ([47] IWS, 2008), offering new markets for internet-based services such as e-banking ([78] Black et al. , 2002) and elearning in education ([59] Muirhead, 2005; [70] Steeples and Jones, 2002). Research on the adoption of the development of new electronic media, the internet in particular, typically views adoption as a function of individual attitudes, the influence of others, the perception of ability to perform particular behaviors, and facilitating factors. Among many adoption models derived from social psychology ([1] Ajzen, 1991; [17] Davis, 1989; [31] Fishbein and Ajzen, 1975), [66] Roger's (2003) innovation diffusion theory highlights the importance of the way the characteristics of innovations are perceived and the attitudes of those who adopt them. For example, [38] Hargittai (1999) and [56] Maitland (1999) discuss the cross-national nature of internetaccess using Rogers' diffusion of innovation approach. [77] Yoh et al. (2003) also adopted Rogers' theory to study of understanding the decision-making process related to internet apparel shopping.
[66] Rogers (2003, p. 19) emphasizes interpersonal communications, and states that diffusion is "a very social process that involves interpersonal communication relationships and takes place on the basis of the experience of near-peers who have taken up the innovation." In order to speed the rate of innovation adoption, he identifies the five most important attributes as relative advantage, compatibility, complexity, trialability, and observability. Accordingly, the adoption of new electronic technology, such as the PC and the internet, partly influences subsequent users on its usefulness and ease of use, and depends on compatibility with the individual's experience, values, and needs.
Furthermore, [54] Lin (1998) suggests that PCs are perhaps the most discontinuous of media technologies, given the relatively high financial resources and skill acquisition (e.g. education) barriers associated with their adoption. The internet can be characterized as a dynamically discontinuous innovation. Although Roger's typology predicts that demographic differences between adopters and non-adopters have been leveling for more "mature" media (e.g. cable and satellite television), [48] Jeffres and Atkin (1996) found that income and education bear only a weak inverse relationship to interest in adopting the internet. Roger's overall view is that diffusion amongst opinion leaders holds the key to product diffusion as a whole; hence, parents (as opinion leaders) pose as a strong influential attribute toward children's adoption of internet usage.
In a recent study, of major food advertisers' web sites for children, [57] Moore and Rideout (2007) identify 11 online marketing policy-relevant issues; underpinning at least some issues of concern, for example, children's online privacy protections and information for parents. Although their study indicates that useful information is available to parents if they choose to access it, they nonetheless draw attention to further study on parental knowledge and views of online marketing practices aimed at children and investigate the extent to which parents know that "information" exists and is helpful. Moreover, given young children's vulnerability on the use of new media (e.g. the internet), they appeal for a broader research agenda in the area to assist public policy, self-regulation, and responsible efforts on the part of in the future. Thus, the authors feel that the study of parental perceptions of children's internet usage offers a response to Moore and Rideout's request for further study.
In consumer behavior theory, perception is a major influential factor in the internal psychological consumer decision-making process, which is important to marketing planners who seek to understand how consumers behave. The process of perception explains how consumers receive, select, organize, and interpret information to create a meaningful picture of the world ([39] Harrell, 1986). The reality is that each person perceives things somewhat differently due to internal factors such as a person's beliefs, experiences, needs, moods, expectations, education, occupation and age, and to external stimuli ([10] Coren, 2004). Specifically, children constantly tend to imitate their parents' behaviors. Therefore, an essential issue involved in this study is seeking to how to expedite the internet adoption rate in Cyprus by identifying and understanding adopters' characteristics (i.e. parents as a major influential factor on their children) that are associated with using the internet.
It is widely accepted that children need to develop computer skills in order to accelerate their learning processes. Given that Cyprus has the lowest internet usage in the EU, children within Cyprus would seem to lag behind other children elsewhere in the EU. Cypriot government interventions have sought on the one hand to stimulate internet usage, and on the other hand to protect children against potential problems of internet usage. Less clear, however, is the impact of parental attitudes toward children's internet usage, which seems to be a restraining factor.
In the twenty-first century, the internet has started to become "unavoidable" in every aspect of human life. This poses challenges and heralds a new debate on both the protection of children and required governmental regulations and public policy. It is therefore important to provide insights into Cypriot parents' perceptions of PCs and the internet, which may help explain why Cyprus seems to be a laggard in comparison with other members of the European Community in the area of internet usage. Thus, the overall research aim is to ascertain how Cypriot parents perceive PCs and the internet, and this leads to three interrelated and specific objectives to explore:
how parents' attitudes lead them to empower their children's use of the internet;
whether parental attitudes act as an obstacle in restraining children's usage of the internet; and
parental rationale for either (1) or (2).
Method
We adopted a quantitative approach via a non-probability quota sampling in an effort to explore and understand parents' perceptions toward their children's internet usage ([69] Sekaran, 2003). Subjects from four main cities of the Republic of Cyprus (Larnaca, Limassol, Nicosia, and Paphos) took part in the survey. Owing to constraints of political geography and language, this survey excluded the Turkish controlled sector (note, the Turkish militarily controlled sector is not included in membership of the EU and access is limited and unrepresentative). Using a snowball sampling collection process ([3] Bryman and Bell, 2003), the sample consists of 430 parents who have children between the ages of 6 and 16; of those, 267 of the responses are useable with an approximately 62 percent acceptable response rate ([60] Neuman, 2003). Only one parent from each family was permitted to respond to the survey, and in general, it took about 15 minutes to complete the questionnaire.
The current study adopted the measures for the survey synthesized from the literature review and the aims of research objectives. The pre-testing is an integral part of the questionnaire development process before the questionnaire is used for the main survey ([5] Churchill, 1999). We first pre-tested the set of the questions, with two academic researchers who were not directly involved with the design of the questionnaire checking technical errors. After revision, 30 parents in Cyprus attended the second pre-test stage in order to minimize bias and provide meaningful responses ([9] Converse and Presser, 1986; [65] Reynolds and Diamantopoulos, 1998). Overall, the pre-test methods helped to ensure the content and construct validities ([3] Bryman and Bell, 2003; [60] Neuman, 2003). The final sample of this research did not include the pre-test subjects. The English questionnaire was first translated into Greek, and then back-translated into English to enhance translation equivalence, by three professional linguists who are influent in both English and Greek ([11] Craig and Douglas, 2005). The back-translation technique was applied to the complete pre-testing procedure to ensure the survey questions had the meaning to the respondents that the researchers intended them to have ([49] Kinnear and Taylor, 1996).
The questionnaire consists of four parts: sample profile, parental perceptions of the PC and the internet, parental influences on children's internet usage, and factors influencing children's internet usage. Apart from the demographic profile, most questions were measured with a five-point Likert-type scale (1, strongly agree; 5, strongly disagree). Table I [Figure omitted. See Article Image.] illustrates a high level of reliability coefficient (Cronbach's alpha) for all these multi-item scales ([37] Hair et al. , 2006). For each of these multi-item measures, we used a mean and standard deviation analysis with the purpose of summarizing the data in a hypothetical value ([30] Field, 2000). Further investigation on whether certain demographic characteristics would affect the tested variables was examined by the independent-samples t -tests and one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) tests.
Findings
Sample profile
Table II [Figure omitted. See Article Image.] presents the summary of sample characteristics. The sample had 57 percent (n =152) females, with the majority (71 percent) aged 30-47. Of the 267 parents, 70 percent of the respondents reported having at least two children. This result mirrors that from a survey on the average of the total fertility rate in Cyprus for 2005, which is two children per family ([34] Globalis, 2006). The number of children's age groups was almost even.
The subjects reported a relatively high degree of education, which probably reflected the fact that the sample was from the urban districts. The largest concentrations of the respondents were in the Foundation (28 percent) and Bachelor (32 percent) groups. In total, 52 percent of the respondents had a bachelor degree or higher, which represented a very high level of higher education among the sample frame. Most respondents were either self-employed or were government or public/private education employees. The above average incomes also reflected the levels of education and employment; 69 percent of the respondents had an annual income of between CY£7,001 and above, which means that a significant number of parents could afford a PC with an internet connection.
Parental perceptions of PC literacy and internet usage
This section first explores parents' ability with digital technology, e.g. the Windows operating system, followed by examining the time they spend on the internet, and their associated rationale for such use. In total, 95 percent of responding parents had a PC at home and used the internet. According to Table III [Figure omitted. See Article Image.], a considerable portion (51 percent) of Cypriot parents had more than five years experience of using PCs; however, nearly a quarter (23 percent) reported only starting to use PCs less than two years previously. Surprisingly, the rate of over five years of internet usage (32 percent) is significantly less than that of the use of a PC (51 percent) in the same period.
We asked parents to what extent they were familiar with eight basic PC programs (α =0.90), including Windows, Microsoft Word/Excel/PowerPoint, Antivirus, DVD/Media Player and Paint. The results showed an extremely high proportion of familiarity among responding parents with Windows (M =1.61, SD=0.78) and Microsoft Word (M =1.68, SD=0.90). In addition, nearly two-thirds of Cypriot parents were able to operate well with Excel (M =2.25), antivirus (M =2.41) and DVD Player (M =2.41), while over 50 percent were aware of using Media player (M =2.65) and PowerPoint (M =2.67). Notably, more than one in three of the respondents were unfamiliar with media player and paint programs. These findings are in contrast to the 2005 Community Survey where [19] Demunter (2006) found that a considerable proportion of the Cypriot population (54 percent) had no basic computer skills at all. This fact is not so surprising when considering Demunter's findings, which show that 53 percent of the Cypriot citizens have never used a computer and majorities of 74 percent do not regularly use the internet. As expected, a noteworthy increase in the percentage of using PCs and accessing the internet since 2005 presents a potential progression of internet adoption recently in the major cities of Cyprus.
The majority of responding parents using the internet at home (70 percent) rather than at work (52 percent) remained roughly the same as previous survey. On a weekly basis, only 30 percent of the respondents spent around one to three hours on using the internet, while only less a quarter (20 percent) used it for more than seven hours. Whereas 92 percent of the respondents had at least one year's experience with PCs, internet access was relatively low when compared with the high percentage of computer adoption. For example, 77 percent of Cypriot parents had used the PCs for over two years, compared with just 57 percent who accessed the internet during the same period.
Based on this study, the subjects primarily viewed the internet as a useful resource tool, with various motivations in terms of investigating the purposes of using the internet (ten items, α =0.85). In a mean ranking order, as expected, the top two functions of internet usage were information search (M =1.84, SD=1.26) and e-mail (M =2.03, SD=1.34), followed by reading news (M =2.50) and learning (M =2.67). Notably, one in three of the respondents reported a relative neutral aspect on the functions of online chatting (M=2.91) and listening to music (M =2.92). Interestingly, over one-third of Cypriot parents disagreed that the internet served as a means of entertainment and leisure, such as holiday booking (M =3.10) and online shopping (M =3.18). In particular, 40 percent did not use it for playing internet games (M =3.25) and comparing price information (M =3.28). These results are likely to reflect others in the current study, where one in three of responding parents reported being unfamiliar with the use of Media player and Paint. Overall, the use of the PC and the internet in Cyprus remain roughly same as in the past, with a strong focus on exchanging e-mails and searching for information, with less concern for leisure/entertainment functions. Nevertheless, the findings call attention as to how to motivate other functions of internet usage in order to accelerate diffusion of the internet.
The independent-samples t -tests reported no significant difference in the PC literacy scores for males (M =2.32, SD=0.90) and females (M =2.32, SD=0.82; t (267)=-0.035, p =0.97). The purposes of internet usage scores showed the same results, with males (M =2.87, SD=1.17) and females (M =2.70, SD=0.98; t (267)=1.27, p =0.21). Additionally, one-way ANOVA tests were conducted to explore the impacts of age, occupation, income and education on levels of parents' PC literacy and the purposes of internet usage. The results reported a statistically significant difference only at the p <0.05 level in the functions of internet usage scores for the six education groups (F =3, p =0.01). The Tukey honestly significant difference test indicated that the mean score for Foundation (M =3.11, SD=1.26) was significantly different from those of the Master (M =2.49, SD=0.73) and PhD (M =2.26, SD=1.11) education groups. As expected, effective internet usage is to a certain degree dependent on education, therefore, educational level is an important factor in the adoption of the internet. The results indicated that the higher educational level was, the greater was the likelihood of using the PC and the internet.
The relationship between parents' PC literacy and their purposes of internet usage was investigated using bivariate correlations. Preliminary analyses were performed to ensure no violation of the assumptions of normality, linearity, and homoscedasticity ([30] Field, 2000). There was a positive correlation between the two variables ( r =0.30, n =267, p <0.0005). The statistics suggest there is a trend that people spending more time with PCs have more opportunity to access and use the internet, which is to be expected. With sufficient motivation and knowledge of the PC and the internet among responding parents, it would be beneficial to study Cypriot children's knowledge of digital literacy and their views of using the internet in the future.
Parental influences on children's internet usage
This section begins by exploring children's PC and internet usages, followed by assessing parental perceptions of the internet's benefits for their children and parental empowerment on children's internet usage. As shown in Table IV [Figure omitted. See Article Image.], the older children were, the greater was the likelihood of their using the PC and the internet. A significant number of children using PCs appeared at the young age of six to nine years (59 percent), which likely reflects on the fact that 95 percent of responding parents owned a PC at home. Like parents, children had more access to the internet at home (64 percent); however, parents only allowed 28 percent of them to log directly onto the internet from home. Overall, children's internet usage - as would be expected - appeared to increase with age and development. The statistics showed that the great majority (92 percent) of older children at age of ten to 16 years old accessed the internet, compared with 69 percent of those aged six to nine. The findings showed that 45 percent of the children spent around one to three hours on the web on a weekly basis; however, nearly one in three children (28 percent) did not use the internet at all.
As regards parental perceptions of internet's benefits for their children (seven items, α =0.83), the subjects had a relatively high portion of agreement on the benefits of using the internet to help their children's homework (M =1.69, SD=0.91), develop children's academic skills (M =2.19, SD=1.03), and broaden children's knowledge beyond academic learning (M =2.20, SD=1.05). More than half of the respondents encouraged their children to use the internet as a medium for improving the ability to read (M =2.49) and increasing the creation of visual images (M =2.52). Notably, while 53 percent of responding parents perceived the benefits of chatting with friends over the internet (M =2.70), near one-third of the subjects (29 percent) however had a disagreement. Surprisingly, over one in three of responding parents (33 percent) disagreed that the internet would encourage children's social relationship development; this finding probably mirrors the fact that a similar proportion of parents do not agree with their children using email for online chatting. Overall, the limited conventional aspects of using the internet may serve to retard internet diffusion and adoption; therefore, it would be useful to investigate how to expand the functions of internet usage among parents in the future.
Further, previous research has suggested that the internet will eventually be as popular as television ([61] New Media Age , 2005; [16] Daily Mail , 2006; [40] Harrowell, 2006; [41] Hollick, 2004). It is thus worthwhile to attempt to understand how Cypriot parents empower on their children's internet usage beyond the beneficial considerations. The following examinations were designed to explore parents' empowerment of their children's internet usage (13 items, α =0.84).
The results showed that parents have positive attitudes toward internet usage for their children. In the top three mean ranking tested variables, the samples reported a considerably high portion of agreement on children being easily taught to use the internet ( M =2.08; SD=0.90), learning more information (M =2.09; SD=0.99) and logging onto the "net" at home (M =2.14; SD=1.11). As expected, the subjects recognized the benefits of children's internet usage (M =2.20); for example, over half of the subjects encouraged their children to use the internet (M =2.62) for searching information (M =2.52).
Despite the positive opinions on the internet as a facilitator of children's learning and development, Cypriot parents also revealed the possible negative effects on affect their children. While English was not perceived as an obstacle for adopting the internet among children ( M =3.13), a significant number of responding parents (62 percent) supervised their children while they were using the internet (M =2.36), as they worried that children could learn "bad" things (M =2.36), and spend less time reading school-based textbooks (M =2.40). Consistent with previous findings in this study, a considerable number of Cypriot parents disagreed that the internet acted as an entertainment tool (M =3.18), for example, for playing online games (M =3.50) or as an excuse for avoiding the children at home (M =3.42). These findings may reflect the strong family bonds across most of southern Europe, where families tend to spend more time together than elsewhere in Europe. It might be worthwhile studying the effects of using the internet as an entertainment tool in the future, and the extent to which both parents and children have knowledge of this.
The independent-sample t -tests indicated no significant differences between the genders with regard to the benefits of children's internet usage scores (t (267)=-0.29, p =0.78) and parental empowerment on children's internet usage scores (t (267)=0.45, p =0.65). In addition, one-way ANOVA tests found significant differences in occupation and income on levels of parental empowerment on children's internet usage. In the six occupation groups, there was a statistically significant difference in the retail and unemployed groups ( F =2.59, p =0.03). Despite reaching statistical significance, the actual difference in mean scores between the groups was small (η 2 =0.02; [8] Cohen, 1988). Meanwhile, the comparison of the annual income also had a significant difference in two income groups (F =2.59, p =0.03). The Tukey HSD test indicated that the mean score for the group of CY£5,001-7,000 (M =2.99, SD=0.90) was significantly different from the group of CY£9,001 and above (M =2.55, SD=0.60); however, the effect size of difference in mean score was medium (η 2 =0.07). Nevertheless, both education and income act as dependent influencing factors, which is in turn dependent on occupation. Not surprisingly, past research indicates that the use of the PC and the internet is highly correlated with higher income at a national or household level.
Further examination of bivariate correlations reported a positive correlation between the benefit of children's internet usage and the parental empowerment of children's internet usage (r =0.43, n =267, p <0.0005), with a high level of perceived parental control associated with higher levels of perceived benefits of children's internet usage. It would be beneficial to study parents' internetusage in a broader context (e.g. beyond information search) in the future, which might motivate overall increasing internet usage in Cyprus.
Factors influencing parents' internet usage
The analysis now investigates to what extent parents have concerns in relation to their own internet usage. We examined the reasons that prevent parents from using the internet (11 items α =0.82), as these concerns may have a great impact on their children's internetusage.
Among the tested variables, the two main concerns that prevented parents from using the internet were viruses (M =2.47, SD=1.16) and the engagement of precious family time (M =2.82, SD=1.26). The results suggested that the agreement on other obstruction variables did not seem to be a considerable concern. For example, the majority of Cypriot parents did not think of the following reasons as retraining factors: internet user-unfriendly ( M =3.54), prohibiting children from using the internet (M =3.56), no interest in using the internet (M =3.62), internet is unnecessary (M =3.73) and do not trust new technology (M =3.78). Apparently, one of the important factors influencing individual's internet access is the price of access. In the present findings, although nearly 40 percent of the subjects did not perceive the cost of internet connection as an obstacle (M =3.02), over one in three of the subjects (35 percent) considered the connect fee was a possible barrier. Clearly, the cheapest internet rate in the EU is not enough to accelerate the internetrate on one hand, and the cost consideration likely poses as obstacle on the other hand.
Other similar debates have appeared on the tested variables, such as 30 percent of the respondents spending enough time on the internet at work; however, 39 percent of the subjects reported this was not a reason to prevent them from using the internet (M=3.18). Although over half of the subjects (51 percent) did not think of unfamiliarity with the internet as an obstacle (M =3.31), an unavoidable figure indicated that one in three responding parents (30 percent) did think so. The last variable in a mean ranking order was English, and over 73 percent of the subjects disagreed that this element was an obstacle to adopting the internet ( M =3.87).
Language, one of the cultural factors, is one of important elements in the communication process; indeed, that is how communication develops, due to each party having overlapping experience with a common language. Through a common language, people can easily exchange information and this fact may facilitate increased internet use in the future. As the internet was first developed in the USA, web site contents tend to be mostly in English. As expected, from literature review, the majority of responding parents (98 percent) spoke English, which implies that language is unlikely to be a barrier for the lowest level of internet usage. Further evidence found in this study has also suggested that parents do not see language as an obstacle to or a concern of children's internet usage.
In addition, the authors thought it was worthwhile to analyze this from another perspective - i.e. Cypriot governmental supportive actions in relation to the internet. Surprisingly, the statistics indicated that most Cypriot parents had little or no knowledge of governmental actions in terms of internet protection. The frequency data showed that 81 percent of the respondents were not aware, for example, of CYTA's sponsorship of a [euro]45 million project for "A Safer internet for the Children", nor indeed of the much vaunted seminar on "Cybersecurity for Our Children" held by CYTA on May 17/18, 2006. Although the results revealed that 45 percent of responding parents knew of the different "filter" programs for avoiding obscene contents, around three quarters (73 percent) did not recognize the function of the "Surfcard" which can restrict access to the internet. Niether did majority of respondents (76 percent) know where to report illegal web sites and harmful nor damaging contents. Even with a reasonable level of PC literacy among parents, most of the subjects (72 percent) had no idea about the free book entitled the Microsoft Internet Safety Guide , even though this is readily available. As indicated in the study by [57] Moore and Rideout (2007), this information is available to parents on the web site; therefore, it would also be beneficial to study how the government should communicate with parents and via which channels, and understand to what extent that parents understand the content of such information (e.g. internet protection actions). Indeed, it seems self-defeatist to promote a guide on how to use the internet via the internet itself, when resistance to adoption and diffusion may be pronounced within a country.
Discussion and conclusion
This study highlights the importance of children's internet protection in relation to the role of parents. Clearly, all efforts to improve internet protection, in addition to governmental communication strategy toward internet protection with long-term results, should be encouraged. Actions such as installing "filter/block" programs (such as the EU SCOFI-project is the first system combining the smart card and internet filtering for the school environment) and providing various forms of parental supervision would most likely lead to improving internet protection. Other actions such as support by qualified internet professionals, educating children's responses to "bad" internet web sites, training parents with relevant internet technology and regulating internet protection schemes would also be especially important given today's environment of new media clutter.
Furthermore, a survey of the international literature on the safety of young internet users highlighted worldwide concerns and a generalized outcome was that schools have a fundamental role in ensuring children's online safety ([76] Wishart, 2004). The study further suggests that children should be made aware of safe practices for surfing the internet in less regulated contexts outside school. For example, in both Britain and the USA, internet practitioners have been quick to see the advantages of catering to a growing educational market online. It is evident that educational commentators not only consider that they have responsibility for educating children about internet safety, but should also be concerned about the learning gaps resulting in some technology-poor schools.
The data in this study are limited by use of non-probability quota sampling with only the views of parents, which may limit the generalization of the results. Overall, the present study has found that most Cypriot parents own a PC at home and have considerable digital literacy and motivations. Moreover, the majority of responding parents has strongly optimistic attitudes toward children's internet usage and understands the benefits for both of them. The findings also provide solid evidence that the internet has acted and is acting as a learning tool for both Cypriot parents and children, and is changing their ways of communicating with others, in particular, for older children (13-16 years old). Given the considerable internet access at home found in this study, this suggests that greater access to home computers may be increasing children's total screen time ([71] Subrahmanyam et al. , 2000). The question lies in the likelihood of virus and harmful/illegal contents from the web. Consequently, parents as opinion leaders have become a major role in accelerating the diffusion of internet adoption among children.
Arguably, Cypriot parents might lack ability/motivation in using and searching the internet, despite the large percentage of parents with a higher level of education in this research. On the other hand, the majority of parents in this study have little knowledge of governmental promotional actions on internet protection. A major Cypriot television channel also reported that the attendance at CYTA's internet seminars was poor, and criticized CYTA's promotional activities. [20] Dikaiakos (2006) states that there are no easy or quick solutions for protecting children from the "dangers" of the internet, but teamwork by parents, governmental and other institutions is urgently required. In marketing strategies, one of the tasks of marketing communications is to speed the process of diffusion so that the return on the investment necessary to develop the innovation will be achieved as quickly and as efficiently as possible. As a result, the present study suggests that CYTA and relevant EU authorities should re-think their promotional strategies and aims of how to make parents understand relevant information easily.
Apart from virus concerns and governmental promotion strategies, this study has found a unique barrier, which has retarded internetadoption in Cyprus. As the second top ranking tested variable, a considerable number of the respondents reveal that internet access occupies much family time. This result not only highlights the cultural factors influencing the penetration of internet adoption, but also calls attention to how marketers develop their strategies in such different context. Thus, it would be beneficial to examine the influence of cultural factors on internet adoption in Cyprus, and compare it with other EU countries in order to gain an in-depth view on how to expedite adoption rate.
In closing, the internet has played a significant role in terms of leading to a multi-way communication process. This technology allows information to be rapidly exchanged without geographic or time-based limitations. Consequently, new interactive electronic online and digital media have changed how both children and adults communicate with each other. In terms of the educational viewpoint, it is evident that the internet teaches children how to develop their cognitive and logical thinking abilities and stimulate their interactive functions through message exchange. To help ensure that internet technology is developed in ways that best serve the needs of Cypriot children, further research is needed to examine the effects of children's media usage along with the considerations of cultural factors. In addition, future studies can also investigate the impact of new media on children's learning and development in order to obtain a more complete picture. While the Cypriot Government has continued to develop and adopt relevant internet safety software, they should however evaluate their promotional strategies, including parental training, and disseminate these materials more widely.
Word count: 9119
Copyright Emerald Group Publishing Limited 2009


