Internet and Internet Use: Teacher Trainees' Perspective
Akinoglu, Orhan. Journal of Instructional Psychology; Mobile Vol. 36, Iss. 2,  (Jun 2009): 97-103.
	•	Full text
	•	Full text - PDF
	•	Details
	•	References 10
Hide highlighting
Full text
	•	TranslateFull text
	•	Turn on search term navigation
Headnote
The aim of this study is to present the development and issues of internet and internet use. The study has a descriptive survey design and 185 randomly selected teacher trainees at Marmara University, Ataturk Education Faculty in the 2001-2002 academic year constitute the sample. Data were collected via a questionnaire prepared by the researcher and analysed using percentages. Results were grouped under the following findings. According to the teacher trainees the most beneficial features of the internet were easy access to information, easy communication, feeling free and being able to access any part of the world, making the best of their free time and educational opportunities. The most harmful features of the internetwere, respectively, loss of time, pornographic content, encouraging bad habits, high telephone bills and being addictive. If they had the chance to create a website on the internet, teacher trainees stated that they would first like to design a website for education, second for personal relations, third for information and entertainment, fourth about their hobbies and fifth about health. When their purposes for using the internet is listed, the first was sending emails, second surfing the web, third looking for information, fourth reading the news and fifth looking for schools and training. 29,5% of the teacher trainees believed that information on the websites is not reliable. 25,3% thought that the roles of school and teachers have diminished in the current century. 26,1% supported the idea that internet technologies offer more original and varied learning opportunities than teachers, 23 ,9% that they offer individual learning opportunities, 23,9% that they provide access to up-to-date information, 15,2% that they offer multi-dimensional interaction opportunities and 10,9% that they facilitate free thinking.
Keywords: Education Technologies, Youth, Teacher Education, Internet Use
With the rapid development of tion technologies, 21st century, defined as the Information Age, has witnessed network of communication that encompasses the whole world.This rapid improvement of information technologies has led societies to a busier life, investment in education has increased and education policies have been established accordingly. Information technologies have been an impulsive force that have changed the structure of the society, culture, tradition, economy and education; established habits and relations have entered a process of renovation through a technology centered transformation (Bakardjieva & Smith, 2001; Bruce, 1999). Internet, which is widely used throughout the world since the 90s, is now the main source of information for written, oral and visual communication among people , for scientific research, productivity, cultural changes, global business and global education (Gross, 2004; James & Prout, 1997; Levy, 2001; Livingstone, 2003). Through information and communication services, internet has brought in multi-dimensionality to many sectors such as health, defence, industry, the public sector and primarily to education. Today, in all parts of the world, staying away from electronic communication and an inability to integrate it into education and thus an inability to benefit from this richness of information and communication is synonymous to being outdated. Only people who are yet to use the internet could be unaware of how this environment can transform the lives of people scientifically and socio-psychologically. Internet constitutes the foundation of new establishments around the world with its features of being a rich data bank, having a broad expansion area, having a rapid update speed, allowing interaction and facilitating easy information transfer. (Surratt, 2001; Turkle, 1995; Weber & Dixon, 2007).
Internet has offered education systems a contemporary understanding and has moved education to a new era in the context of technology. The internet, above all, offers freedom to individuals; one can stay away from the problems of formal education and can complement her/his deficiencies in the way s/he wants since learning is individual (David, Edwards & Alldred, 2001). On the internet individuals can have free and unlimited access to knowledge according to their own needs. Internet users are completely equal in their access to information (Livingstone, 2003). Internet users are free from the repressive and authoritarian environment of some on-site formal education systems which is sometimes boring for the learner and which can put the learner off accessing information. Individuals would like to learn when they really want to and when they require information and they tend to use this information in their own lives. Internet stimulates new learning styles and mediates the improvement of independent and self-directed learning skills.
Today, the effects of computers and the internet are experienced in all areas of life more than ever before. However, several institutions and individuals have been facing various problems . Main issues include the way internet is used in education, the reliability of in ternetresources, addiction to internet use and its effects on communication and social life (Weber & Dixon, 2007). In the 21st century, it becomes much more important for teachers to know about information technologies and, thus, for us to know about how teachers use these technologies . Today the biggest problem of education systems is not a lack of hardware , i.e., computers, internet, classrooms or materials but is an inability to have the required perspective for the information age. What teacher trainees, architects of the information society, do on the internet and how they are effected by it are crucially important in order to evaluate the individual, public and global effects from a broader perspective.
Aim of the study
The aim of this study is to present the development and problems of the internet and internet use from the teacher trainees' perspective. The following sub-problems were addressed around this main purpose.
Sub-problems
1. What are the most beneficial features of the internet use according to teacher trainees?
2. What are the most harmful features of the internet use according to teacher trainees?
3 . Given the opportunity to design a website on the internet, on which topic would teacher trainees prefer to create a website?
4. For what purposes do teacher trainees use the internet?
5. Do teacher trainees believe information on the internet is reliable?
6. Do teachertraineesthinktheroleof school and teachers has diminished in the current information age? Why?
Method
Research Design
The current study has a descriptive survey design. This design is used to outline the present circumstances and relationships of a topic or situation.
Participants
The participants were 185 teachertrainees at Marmara University, Ataturk Education Faculty during the 200 1 -2002 academic year. The participants were randomly selected. There were 71 participants from Science Education (years 2, 3 and 4), 61 from Social Sciences Education (years 2, 3 and 4), and 53 from Computer Education (years 1 , 2 and 4). 70,8% (131) of the participants were 21-25 years old and 29 0% (54) were 16-20 years old.For gender, while54,l% (100) were male, 45 ,9% (85) were female. Their use of internet varied: 46,2% spent 2-3 hours, 35,7% spent 0-1 hour, 11% spent 4-5 hours, 5,5% spent more than 8 hours, and 1 ,6% spent 6-7 hours per day on the internet on weekdays.
Data Collection and Analysis
Data was collected via a questionnaire prepared by the researcher in order to determine the use of internet for purposes of education and social networking. The type and order of questions were determined by a pilot study of four months based on observation and analysis. During this stage, questionnaire items were written. In order to maintain the intelligibility of the questions and make necessary amendments four experts of sociology, educational psychology, educational technology and assessment were consulted. Two subsequent pilot studies were then conducted using similar participants. As a result, some of the questions were replaced and some were removed. All stages of data collection were carried out by the researcher himself. The results were analysed in relation to the aims of the study, presented in tables and explained accordingly. Questionnaire data was analysed using SSPS for WINDOWS Release 10.0 and the survey results were interpreted using percentages.
Results
First Sub-Problem: Most beneficial features of the internet from the teacher trainees ' perspective; The findings indicate that for 64,8% of the teacher trainees easy access to information; for 1 8 ,2% , easy communication ; for 6,3%, feeling free; for 6,3% being able to access any part of the world; for 2,8%, making the best of their free time; and for 1 ,7%, educational opportunities is the most beneficial feature of the internet(Table 1).
Second Sub-Problem: Most harmful features of the internet according to teacher trainees; 27,5% of the teacher trainees stated that loss of time was the most harmful feature of the internet. For 1 6 ,2% pornographic content; for 12% preventing face-to-face interaction; for 11,4% encouraging bad habits; for 9,6% high telephone bills; for 9% being addictive; for 5,4% chatting; for 4,8% being unsafe for online shopping; for 40% causing health problems was the most harmful feature of the internet (Table 2).
Enlarge this image.
Table 1 Distribution of the most beneficial features of the internet according to teacher trainees
Enlarge this image.
Table 2 Distribution of the most harmful features of the internet according to teacher trainees
Third Sub-Problem: Given the opportunity to design a website on the internet, on which topic would teacher trainees prefer to create a website?; Teacher trainees preferred the following topics had they given the opportunity to create a website: 49,4% on education, 17,3% on personal relations, 12,2% informative and entertaining, 11,5% about their hobbies , 3 0% on health , 3 ,2% on economy, and 3,2% on politics (Table 3).
Fourth Sub-Problem: Teacher trainees' reasons of internetuse; In the current study, teacher trainees' main five purposes of internet use were found to be the following:
91% Sending emails
85% Surfing the web
79% Looking for information
69% Reading the news
61% Looking for schools and training
Fifth Sub-Problem: Whether the teacher trainees think information on the internet is reliable; When asked how reliable they think information on the internet is, 68,3% of the teacher trainees stated that they believed it to be reliable. While 29,5% stated the opposite, 2,2% believed it was partly reliable (Table 4).
Sixth Sub-Problem: Do teacher trainees think the role of school and teachers has diminished in the current information age? Why?; When asked about whether the role of schools and teachers has diminished or not in the current information age, 74,7% of the participants stated that their function had not diminished and 25,3% believed that it had (Table 5).
Enlarge this image.
Table 3 Distribution of the preferences of the teacher trainees on the topic they would design a website were they given the opportunity
Enlarge this image.
Table 4 Distribution of whether teacher trainees believed information on the internet is reliable Table 5 Distribution of whether teacher trainees thought the function of schools and teachers diminished in the current information age Table 6 Distribution of why teacher trainees believe the function of schools and teachers have diminished in the current information age
The reasons behind why teacher trainees believed the function of schools and teachers diminished were several. 26,1% thought the internet could provide more original and varied learning opportunities than teachers; 23,9% believed it could provide individual learning opportunities; 23,9% stated that it allows access to up-to-date information; 15,2% mentioned multi-dimensional interaction opportunities it offers; and 10,9% emphasized that internet facilitates free thinking (Table 6).
Conclusion
The findings of the present study reveal that, from the teacher trainees' perspective, the most beneficial feature of the internet was easy access to information . Second most beneficial feature was easy communication, feeling free and being able to access any part of the word.Thirdmost beneficial feature was stated as making the best of free time and fourth was educational opportunities it offers . This was also an indication of how much the youth values access to information, communication , freedom and interaction throughout the world. When the most harmful features of the internet are listed according to teacher trainees that participated in the study, loss of time was the first, pornographic content was the second.encouraging bad habits was third, high telephone bills was fourth and being addictive was fifth. It is important here that teacher trainees emphasized pornographic content on the internet and the possibility to encourage bad habits.
Given the opportunity to design a website, the first choice of teacher trainees for content was education, second was personal relations, third was information and entertainment, fourth was hobbies and fifth was health. These results could be mapped onto the teacher trainees' reasons of internet use. When their purposes of internet use are listed , the first was sending emails, second surfing the web , third looking for information ,fourth reading the news and the fifth was looking for schools and training.
When inquired about whether teacher trainees believed information on the internet is reliable, 29,5% stated it was not and 2,2% expressed that it was partly reliable. 25,3% of the participants thought that the functions of schools and teachers have diminished in the current information age. The reasons behind this idea were probed. 26,1% of the participants who believed to role of schools and teachers diminished (25,3%) favoured the internet because they argued that internet offers more original and varied learning opportunities than schools and teachers. Other reasons were as follows: internet provides individual learning opportunities (23,9%), up-to-date information is available on the internet (23,9%), internet facilitates multidimensional interaction ( 1 5 0%) and internet promotes free thinking (10,9%). These findings imply that information age technologies are believed to provide more original and varied learning opportunities than schools and teachers. This suggests crucial implications for a re-consideration of the traditional teacher model.
References
References
Bakardjieva, M. & Smith, R. (200 1 ). The Internet in Everyday Life: computing technologies from the standpoint of the domestic user. New Media and Society 3(1), 67-83.
Bruce, H. (1999). Perceptions of the Internet: what people think when they search the Internet for information. Internet Research: Electronic Networking Applications and Policy 9(3), 187-199.
David, M., Edwards, R. & Alldred, P. (2001). Children and school-based research: 'informed consent' or 'educated consent'? British educational research journal, 27(3), 347-365.
Gross, E. (2004). Adolescent internet use: What we expect , what teens report . Applied Developmental Psychology, 25(6), 633-649.
James, A. & Prout.A. (Eds.) (1997). Constructing and reconstructing childhood: contemporary issues in the sociological study of childhood. London: Falmer.
Levy, P. (2001). Cyberculture. MN: University of Minnesota
Livingstone, S. (2003). Children's use of the Internet: Reflections on the emerging search agenda. New Media and Society, 5, (2), 147-166.
Surratt, C. G. (2001). The Internet and social change. NC: McFarland & Company.
Turkle, S. (1995). Life on the Screen: Identity in the age of the Internet. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
Weber, S. & Dixon, S. (2007). Growing up online: Young people and digital technologies. NY: Palgrave, Mcmillan.
AuthorAffiliation
Dr. Orhan Akmoglu, Atatürk .Faculty of Education, Marmara University, ,34722 Kadiköy /Istanbul, Turkey.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Dr.Orhan Akinoglu at orhanakinoglu@gmail.com
Copyright Journal of Instructional Psychology Jun 2009

