Beijing snaps back at Clinton internet criticism
Tze-wei, Ng; Kwok, Kristine. South China Morning Post; Hong Kong [Hong Kong]23 Jan 2010: 4.
	•	Full text
	•	Abstract/Details
Hide highlighting
Abstract
TranslateAbstract
The Global Times website carried several harshly worded commentaries, rejecting Google's attitude in its dispute with mainland authorities and US internet policy, rather than [Clinton]'s speech, which was titled "Pushing for internet freedom and promoting internet-mediated foreign policy".
"The Google incident is only a pawn in US internet strategy. America's intention to claim internet hegemony is very obvious," said one article. "The United States is trying to lead people to believe that the internet has only got an open sea, and no territorial sea, but on this open sea, the United States has strong ships and cannons, and is practically controlling the whole internet."
"The seminar was held to gauge Chinese internet users' response to Clinton's speech, there was nothing new in what the embassy officials said," Wen said. "But this is an indication that the US really attaches importance to the use of the internet and its potential in the future.
More
Full Text
	•	TranslateFull text
	•	Turn on search term navigation
Beijing has snapped back at US Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton's cyber policy speech, urging America to stop "using so-called internet freedom issues to unreasonably accuse China".
However, the US was apparently more interested in gauging reaction from the vibrant cyber community on the mainland.
The US embassy and consulates in two cities invited dozens of internet writers, including both liberal and pro-Beijing activists, to comment on Clinton's speech and other issues of internet freedom in a Twitter forum.
Mainland media remained largely silent, apart from carrying the comments by the foreign ministry, although Twitterers who managed to get around the censors welcomed Clinton's concept of a "freedom to connect".
"The United States criticised China's internet management policy, and hinted that China restricts internetfreedom. We strongly oppose such comments, which are untrue, and damaging to Sino-American relations," foreign ministry spokesman Ma Zhaoxu said yesterday.
"China has its own national circumstances and cultural tradition. China's management of the internet is in accordance with the law, and is in line with international practice."
Yesterday morning a handful of news portals carried a Xinhua report of Clinton's speech which hardly mentioned any details.
The Global Times website carried several harshly worded commentaries, rejecting Google's attitude in its dispute with mainland authorities and US internet policy, rather than Clinton's speech, which was titled "Pushing for internet freedom and promoting internet-mediated foreign policy".
"The Google incident is only a pawn in US internet strategy. America's intention to claim internet hegemony is very obvious," said one article. "The United States is trying to lead people to believe that the internet has only got an open sea, and no territorial sea, but on this open sea, the United States has strong ships and cannons, and is practically controlling the whole internet."
On Twitter and some internet chat rooms the reaction was completely different. Many thanked Clinton for the speech, and others got excited over her promise to promote technology that could help people sidestep government censorship.
"As I speak to you today, government censors somewhere are working furiously to erase my words from the records of history" became a hot phrase on Twitter.
"Can't imagine it, the American is 'serving the people'. This should have been done by China officials!" said one internet user on The Southern Metropolis Daily website.
In her one-hour speech Clinton mentioned China several times, when she talked about "seeing a spike of threats in free flow of information" and the Google incident, urging China to carry out a thorough and transparent investigation.
She added that the US would also launch an innovation competition to collect the "best ideas for applications and technologies that help break down language barriers, overcome illiteracy, connect people to the services and information they need".
The US government yesterday organised a Twitter forum to hear opinions about the speech. About 45 mainland internet users - mostly bloggers and internet freedom critics - participated in the synchronised briefing held by the embassy in Beijing and consulates in Shanghai and Guangzhou.
It was the second time such a forum had been held. The first one was held before US President Barack Obama's visit to China. But unlike the previous forum, the US invited pro-Beijing internet activists, including Anti-CNN website founder Rao Jin , to the forum.
Guangzhou-based blogger Wen Yunchao , one of those who took part, said embassy officials fielded questions from 10 guests and mostly responded with references to Clinton's speech on Thursday.
"The seminar was held to gauge Chinese internet users' response to Clinton's speech, there was nothing new in what the embassy officials said," Wen said. "But this is an indication that the US really attaches importance to the use of the internet and its potential in the future.
"Most of the questions asked were on details of US government policies such as whether it will fund software to avoid censorship. And people like Rao Jin linked internet freedom to the issue of internet security."
Ai Weiwei , a prominent mainland artist and outspoken critic who also took part in the forum, said he considered Clinton's speech an "opportunity for self-reflection and self-education".
"It will have no impact on the Chinese government, it refuses to talk about this subject," Ai said.
Google chief executive Eric Schmidt said this week the company intended to stay in China, but hopefully on different terms, after a row over alleged hacking of Gmail accounts.
Word count: 737
Copyright South China Morning Post Ltd. Jan 23, 2010

