Internet a vital tool for farmers
Sue Colucci For the Times-News. Times News; Hendersonville, N.C. [Hendersonville, N.C]04 Apr 2010.
	•	Full text
	•	Abstract/Details
Hide highlighting
Abstract
TranslateAbstract
Most of us are familiar with Web sites and blogs, but what is social networking? Social networking is an interaction between a group of people that share a common interest. We do this all the time in real life, by attending classes that spark our interests or clubs that involve our hobbies. But this trend is moving online. Some of the most popular social networking Web sites are Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, MySpace, Flickr and Classmates.com.
Social networking sites, especially Facebook and Twitter, are great avenues for farms to create "buzz" around their products. These sites allow business owners to connect to customers, post photos, important information about their products, and upcoming events. Social networking sites are the new "word of mouth."
Full Text
	•	TranslateFull text
	•	Turn on search term navigation
The Internet is rapidly becoming one of the best tools for businesses, including farms, to market their products. More than 77 percent of American adults use the Internet.
Of these, 81 percent are searching the Web for information that will help them make decisions on what they purchase. Because of this trend, businesses are using Web sites, blogs and social networking sites to market their products.
Most of us are familiar with Web sites and blogs, but what is social networking? Social networking is an interaction between a group of people that share a common interest. We do this all the time in real life, by attending classes that spark our interests or clubs that involve our hobbies. But this trend is moving online. Some of the most popular social networking Web sites are Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, MySpace, Flickr and Classmates.com.
Social networking sites, especially Facebook and Twitter, are great avenues for farms to create "buzz" around their products. These sites allow business owners to connect to customers, post photos, important information about their products, and upcoming events. Social networking sites are the new "word of mouth."
Are you a farmer who is interested in marketing your products, agritourism experience, farmers market or other aspect of your farm business via the Internet? If so, the N.C. Cooperative Extension Service is offering a great training just for you. The "Internet Marketing Series for Farmers" will run for four consecutive weeks starting on April 12. The classes will be held at Earth Fare in West Asheville (66 Westgate Parkway) from 10 a.m. to noon. All trainings are hands-on and participants are encouraged to BYOL (bring your own laptop).
The fee for the classes is $10/class or $35 for the four-week series. Each class is limited to 25 participants, so register early. The class schedule is -- April 12: Facebook and Twitter; April 19: Blogs; April 26: Web sites; May 3: Using Videos to Enhance Your Site.
To register, contact Erin Bonito at the Buncombe County Cooperative Extension Office (erin_bonito@ncsu.edu or 828-255-5522).
Here are some staggering statistics about social networking sites, traditional Web sites and blogs:
u Facebook users increased 145 percent from January 2009 to January 2010.
u The number of Facebook users older than 55 increased 922.7 percent from January 2009 to January 2010.
u 35- to 54-year-olds are the most rapidly increasing demographic using Facebook. This demographic roughly doubles every two months.
u More than 1.5 million pieces of content are shared on Facebook daily.
u There are about 50 million tweets every day on Twitter (twitter.com).
u That is 600 tweets per second.
u There are more than 200,000,000 blogs.
u 54 percent of bloggers post or tweet daily.
u 34 percent of bloggers post opinions about products or brands.
u 78 percent of consumers trust peer recommendations.
u Only 14 percent of consumers trust advertisements.
These statistics were found on Facebook's Social Ads Platform (www.istrategylabs.com) and socialnomics.net.
Word count: 490
Copyright New York Times Company Apr 4, 2010

