'Trickle-Down Government' and Internet Freedom; While tyrants make a run at global Internet censorship, the Obama administration stands by passively.
L. Gordon Crovitz. Wall Street Journal (Online); New York, N.Y. [New York, N.Y]07 Oct 2012: n/a.

Abstract
[...]this administration is standing idly by as countries such as China, Russia and Iran work to get the United Nations to bless censorship on the Web.\n
Full Text
The presidential debate on Oct. 3 didn't get around to digital technology and the role of government, but the candidates were sure to have prepped for the topic. These draft remarks were discovered, left behind on Mitt Romney's lectern:
Last year I got a question at a town-hall meeting in New Hampshire about the role of government in regulating the Internet. I said, "Almost none--Keep it free." I said there's no reason for the government to look for a solution when there's not a problem.
An open Internet has been a main source of America's competitive strength, but President Obama's policies are undermining the open Internet. His trickle-down government is getting more and more involved with Silicon Valley, with high tech becoming yet another example of crony capitalism.
Regulators at the Federal Trade Commission, the Federal Communications Commission and other agencies are slowing digital innovation. A few years ago, not many Silicon Valley companies had lobbyists in Washington. Now they all do, to protect themselves, just like analog industries. Freethinkers from Bill Gates to Steve Jobs warned it wasn't supposed to be this way for tech companies.
The president came to office talking about "net neutrality," but this never made sense. Everyone favors open access to the Web with no discrimination based on content, but the net neutrality crowd also wanted regulators to control prices and how broadband can be used. As the Republican platform says, this administration operates "on precedents from the nineteenth century," with the FCC playing the heavy-handed role of the now-disbanded Interstate Commerce Commission, "trying to micromanage telecom as if it were a railroad network."
Prospects for innovation on the Internet are worse than four years ago. The FTC has forced companies including Google, Facebook and Twitter to enter consent decrees lasting an astonishing 20 years. These let regulators oversee the companies' online advertising policies in the name of protecting users' privacy.
Many in the industry warn that will lead to a decline in advertising and thus in free, ad-supported services for people. My administration will instead enforce rules requiring disclosure about how websites target advertising to users, giving people the option to say no.
Mr. President, what happened to broadband? Your officials have rightly warned of a spectrum crunch due to smartphones and tablets like the iPad, but you haven't held a single spectrum auction.
Your government lawyers instead are using antitrust law as a form of regulation, deciding which mobile companies can merge to get access to more spectrum and which can't. Bureaucrats aren't building any solutions, and Americans now have some of the slowest, most unreliable broadband connections in the developed world.
People were so offended by your "you didn't build that" comments because it's enterprising people and not government officials who build a dynamic economy. Your attitude means fewer jobs and less innovation.
In that same speech, you said the government created the Internet with the purpose of making it a big part of our economy. Wrong and wrong. The private sector played a huge role in creating the  Internet. And you may recall that liberals objected strongly in the 1990s to the idea that it should become legal for everyone to use the  Internet, not just academics and the military. The modern  Internet flourished only after it was deregulated and opened up for all to use.
Finally, this administration is standing idly by as countries such as China, Russia and Iran work to get the United Nations to bless censorship on the Web. Authoritarian countries are trying to use a review of global networks by the International Telecommunications Union to undermine the open  Internet. These tyrants want to cut their citizens off from the Web and to get the U.N.'s blessing for shutting down services like Facebook and Twitter.
These efforts to close off the Web and legitimize censorship remind me of how U.N. agencies like Unesco tried to push a "New World Information Order" a generation ago. That would have undermined free speech and open media in the pre-Web world. With bipartisan support, President Reagan responded by having the U.S. leave Unesco. In the face of a similar threat now, your administration is silent and passive. I'll speak loudly and carry a big stick.
Our economy and our values require an open  Internet. At home, bureaucrats need to get out the way of private-sector innovation. Abroad, a president needs to stop foreign regimes before they close off what has been a wonderfully world-wide Web. So, there are real differences between us on something as important as technology.
Just in case these prepared remarks are imaginary, perhaps someone will ask the candidates about this topic at the next debate.
Credit: By L. Gordon Crovitz
Word count: 794
(c) 2012 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. Reproduced with permission of copyright owner. Further reproduction or distribution is prohibited without permission.


