Internet Society; Internet Infrastructure Leader Afilias Signs as Presenting Sponsor for 2013 Internet Hall of Fame
Internet Weekly News; Atlanta [Atlanta]25 Feb 2013: 4.

	•	Full text
	•	Abstract/Details
Hide highlighting
Abstract
Translate Abstract
Afilias is a leading global provider of Internet infrastructure solutions that connect people to their data. "Because of our leading-edge work in providing Internet infrastructure and managing top-level domains, Afilias is able to see the Internet from a unique viewpoint. 
Full Text
	•	Translate Full text
	•	Turn on search term navigation
2013 FEB 25 (VerticalNews) -- By a News Reporter-Staff News Editor at Internet Weekly News -- The InternetHall of Fame announced that Afilias has signed as a Presenting Sponsor for the 2013 Internet Hall of Fame. The Internet Hall of Fame offers sponsorship opportunities to extend the global reach of the program and strengthen its ability to document Internet history and the individuals who have helped to define it. 
"The Internet Hall of Fame celebrates individuals who have helped to build and develop the Internet in every part of the world, and captures the history of this development process," noted Walda Roseman, Chief Operating Officer of the Internet Society, which established the Internet Hall of Fame. "Corporate partners are integral to this effort, and we are extremely grateful to Afilias for their commitment and support in recognizing these extraordinary people who have helped shape the Internet that we all enjoy today." Afilias is a leading global provider of Internet infrastructure solutions that connect people to their data. "Because of our leading-edge work in providing Internet infrastructure and managing top-level domains, Afilias is able to see the Internet from a unique viewpoint. We know that the start and ongoing growth of the Internet is due to the dedicated work of men and women across the globe, many of whom have worked in obscurity. Being able to recognize the contributions of these individuals, who have helped make our own success possible, is a privilege for Afilias. That's why we're proud to support the Internet Hall of Fame and its work," said Roland LaPlante, Senior Vice President, Afilias. 
The second annual Internet Hall of Fame ceremony will be held June 26, 2013, in Istanbul, Turkey. The Internet Hall of Fame will be accepting nominations for the 2013 awards through February 18, 2013, and the nomination form can be found at www.internethalloffame.org/nominations. 
For more details on Internet Hall of Fame sponsorships, email: Hall.of.Fame@isoc.org. About the Internet Hall of Fame The Internet Hall of Fame is an annual awards program that has been established by the InternetSociety to publicly recognize a distinguished and select group of leaders and luminaries who have made significant contributions to the development and advancement of the global open Internet. More information on the program can be found at www.internethalloffame.org. About the Internet Society The Internet Society is the trusted independent source for Internet information and thought leadership from around the world. With its principled vision and substantial technological foundation, the Internet Society promotes open dialogue on Internet policy, technology, and future development among users, companies, governments, and foundations. Working with its members and Chapters around the world, the Internet Society enables the continued evolution and growth of the Internet for everyone. For more information, see: http://www.internetsociety.org . About Afilias Afilias is a global provider of Internet infrastructure services that connect people to their data. Afilias' reliable, secure, scalable, and globally available technology supports a wide range of applications including Internet domain registry services, Managed DNS and mobile Web services. For more information on Afilias, visit www.afilias.info. 
Keywords for this news article include: Technology, World Wide Web, Internet Societies, InternetInfrastructure. 
Our reports deliver fact-based news of research and discoveries from around the world. Copyright 2013, NewsRx LLC 
Word count: 540
Copyright 2013, Internet Weekly News via NewsRx.com

