https://search-proquest-com.libproxy2.usc.edu/docview/1619361162/C8E20926EFA94465PQ/5?accountid=14749

Google announces Indian Language Internet Alliance, aims for 500 million internet users by 2017 [Internet]
Chawla, Mehak. The Economic Times (Online); New Delhi [New Delhi]04 Nov 2014.
In an effort to promote local language content on the internet, Google also announced its Hindi Voice Search. [...]if we needed more testimony, it lies in the fact that Sundar Pichai, now widely claimed as one of the top contenders for the top job in Google came to India to kick off the Android One journey.

Stressing the need for Indian language content on the Internet, Google's India MD, Rajan Anandan has today announced the Indian Language Internet Alliance. Anandan also said that Google aims to get 500 million internet users in India by 2017. In an effort to promote local language content on the internet, Google also announced its Hindi Voice Search. It also launched the website hindiWeb.com, which shall offer curated content in Hindi.
With this announcement, Google voice search and Knowledge Graph suggestions will be available in Hindi with the option of multiple Hindi fonts available at Google.com/fonts. Stuff like Keyboard Predictions in Hindi, already available on Android One devices shall also be extended.
Google has been investing significant marketing efforts and energy in India. In September, it launched its Android One devices with standardized hardware, stock Android experience and timely updates. Though the devices are all priced above the mental barrier of Rs 5000, Google expects to break into the extremely lucrative low end smartphone segment with its Android One offerings. And if we needed more testimony, it lies in the fact that Sundar Pichai, now widely claimed as one of the top contenders for the top job in Google came to India to kick off the Android One journey.
With its voice search and translation now available in Hindi, Google has taken a definitive step in the Indian internet landscape. India has 19.8 crore English speakers, almost all of them online, Anandan said today. Regional language content will go a long way in getting the next wave of users online.
Stressing the need for local language content, Amit Singhal, the man behind Google Search, who also gave his presentation in Hindi said that mobile is the future of search.
Word Count: 289
Copyright Bennett, Coleman & Company Limited Nov 04, 2014

