https://search-proquest-com.libproxy2.usc.edu/docview/1476454068/2F447C3A9F1A4478PQ/8?accountid=14749

Internet addiction among young people in China: Internet connectedness, online gaming, and academic performance decrement
Abstract
TranslateAbstract
Purpose - The purpose of this paper is to investigate the interrelationships between internet connectedness, online gaming, internetaddiction symptoms, and academic performance decrement among the internet-dependent young people in China. Design/methodology/approach - A paper-based survey was conducted among the young clients in one of the earliest and largest internet addiction clinics in China. A total of 594 in-patients (mean age=17.76 y) voluntarily participated in this study. Findings - By adopting the concept of internet connectedness, this study explored the internet use patterns among the young internet addicts, for example, internet café patrons and those who use internet with more goals or higher degree of internet adhesiveness had more internet addiction symptoms. Online gaming was found to play a significant role in the development of internet addiction. As expected, the level of internet addiction is significantly linked to academic performance decrement. Consistent with previous studies, males showed higher degree of internet connectedness and online game usage than females. Noticeably, the moderation effect of online game playing and the mediating effect of internet addiction were also tested. Research limitations/implications - This research is focussed on the internet-dependent group, thus the generalizability of the results need to be interpreted with caution. Practical implications - This study provides insight for parents, educators, health professionals, and policy makers regarding treatment and intervention for internet addiction among young people in China. Originality/value - Since very little research has been done focussing on diagnosed internet-dependent group, this paper scores as a pioneering study of its kind in China.
More
Full Text
	•	TranslateFull text
	•	Turn on search term navigation
Introduction
In about ten years, internet addiction has undergone a remarkable metamorphosis in China, from a psychiatric curiosity to a publicly recognized health risk, especially among young people. The internet users under 30 now account for 58.2 percent of the total Netizen population ([15] CNNIC, 2012), thus young people have become the main body of the Chinese internet users ([24] Huang et al. , 2009). According to the latest version of research report on internet addiction conducted by China Youth Internet Association, 14.1 percent of the adolescent internet users in urban China are suffering from internet addiction, which is about 24 million of them ([16] China Youth Internet Association (CYIA), 2010, p. 7). The rate in rural area is close to this one, therefore the total approximated figure can reach 33 million, almost twice as many as the number in 2005 ([16] CYIA, 2010). There are also about 18.6 million adolescent internetusers in urban China show their tendency toward internet addiction ([16] CYIA, 2010, p. 8). China is now struggling with this new plight. It is estimated that approximately 11 percent of the Chinese internet users have internet dependence ([14] CNNIC, 2009, p. 41), and 27.1 percent of the adolescent internet users in China have an inclination to internet addiction, to the detriment of work, study, and social life ([13] CNNIC, 2008).
Therefore, the Chinese Government tries to regulate the internet and peoples' internet use in different ways. For example, no internetcafés or game labs are allowed to operate within 200 meters around schools, strict licensing procedures, control of the business hours, restrictions of minors' entry into internet cafés, and installation of the anti-addiction software ([48] Tao, 2007). The effectiveness of such moves is debatable, but they undoubtedly enable legislators to show that they are doing something about this seemingly intractable social problem ([4] Buckingham, 2002). Internet addiction as an issue has been included in the Law of the People's Republic of China on the Protection of Minors in 2007 ([48] Tao, 2007). Currently, more and more research projects, therapeutic clinics, psychiatric counseling centers, and self-help groups have mushroomed in urban China ([27] Jiang and Leung, 2012).
However, neither in China nor in other social contexts, research focussed on the internet-dependent users remains rather sparse. Previous studies on internet addiction mainly used high school and university student samples, in both China and western societies ([5] Byun et al. , 2009; [24] Huang et al. , 2009). Thus, the purpose of this study is to fill the gap by examining the internet-dependent group, specifically among young people. Based on an in-depth review of relevant studies, this study aims to evaluate the internet use of the internet-dependent respondents and investigate the interrelationships among internet addiction, internet connectedness, online gaming, and academic performance decrement.
Literature review
Internet addiction
Previous research has alleged that excessive internet use can be pathological and addictive, which is treated as internet addiction disorder (IAD) in clinical settings ([18] Furnell and Warren, 1997; [30] Kingsley and Anderson, 1998; [40] Mafé and Blas, 2006; [53] Widyanto and Griffiths, 2006). Past studies on internet addiction revealed numerous symptoms shared by other forms of addiction, including substance-based addictions, such as tolerance, withdrawal, preoccupation, numerous unsuccessful attempts to cut down use of the internet, and feeling restless without internet ([24] Huang et al. , 2009; [53] Widyanto and Griffiths, 2006).
Scholars have developed various scales to study IAD symptoms, such as [41] Morahan-Martin and Schumacher's (2000) 13-question scale, [45] Scherer's (1997) ten-item checklist of IAD symptoms, [54] Young's (1998a) eight-item questionnaire, and Chinese InternetAddiction Scale by [7] Chen and Chou (1999). Generally, [54] Young's (1998a) classical eight-item Internet Addiction Diagnostic Questionnaire (DQ), which was modified from DSM-IV (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders - Fourth Edition ) criteria for pathological gambling, is widely used to examine IAD symptoms. [54] Young's (1998a) DQ is a set of eight questions related to the individual's preoccupation with the internet, amount of time spent online, and effects of the internet in one's life ([9] Chou et al. , 2005). In this study, IAD symptoms were measured based on [54] Young's (1998a) DQ.
Internet connectedness
In order to investigate internet addiction, specific instrument is needed to measure an individual's overall internet use pattern. Based on media system dependency theory, internet connectedness was developed to capture a person's overall relationship with the internet ([28] Jung et al. , 2001; [36] Loges and Jung, 2001). Facing the limitations of conventional binary measure (access/non-access) or a time-based measure (number of hours spent on the internet), [28] Jung et al. (2001) developed the multi-dimensional concept of internet connectedness index (ICI), which incorporates conventional measures such as time, history, and context, and also goes beyond to capture scope, intensity, and centrality of internet in one's life.
The ICI is composed of nine factors, which are internet use history, task scope, site scope, goal scope, activity scope, time scope, evaluation of the internet, internet dependency, and computer dependency. Specifically, internet use history was operationalized as the number of years a person has used the internet. Task scope referred to the number of tasks for a person to use internet. Site scope concerned the places where a person connects to the internet, such as home, internet café, school, a community center, or a public library. Goal scope adopted the six media-system dependency goals by [1], [2] Ball-Rokeach (1985, 1998), including two understanding goals (social understanding and self-understanding), two orientation goals (action orientation and interaction-orientation), solitary play, and social play. Activity scope was about the online activities people participating in, such as bulletin boards (BBS), chat rooms, weblog, game playing, social network sites (SNS), video/audio viewing/downloading, research/information, shopping, and surfing the web. Time scope indicated the intensity of internet use. Evaluation indicates how the internet affects individuals' personal life. Internet dependency was measured by asking "Imagine that you woke up tomorrow to find that the Internethad vanished, how much would you miss being able to use the Internet, using the 10-point scale where 1 means you wouldn't miss it at all and 10 means you would miss it an extreme amount?" Computer dependency was measured by asking similar question above, but instead awaking to find that computer had vanished. The modified version of ICI includes some updated items, such as broadband access and 3G mobile internet access ([33] Leung, 2010).
As a measure with multiple items, ICI may capture more aspects of people's internet use ([28] Jung et al. , 2001; [33] Leung, 2010; [36] Loges and Jung, 2001). Moreover, ICI should have a greater likelihood than the conventional single-item measures of producing significant outcomes, simply on statistical grounds. Therefore, it is reasonable to predict the following:
H1. Those with higher degree of ICI tend to show more IAD symptoms.
Online gaming
As [55] Young (1998b) stated, the internet itself is not addictive. Dependents are less likely to control their use of highly interactive features than other online applications ([49] Toral et al. , 2009; [56] Young and Rodgers, 1998; [57] Zhou, 2011). Prior research has speculated that specific applications, especially those entertainment applications with immersive or interactive features, appeared to play a significant role in the development of pathological internet use, and pose great threat to the well-being of the users ([29] Kim et al. , 2009; [50] Wan and Chiou, 2006). In particular, online games are such entertainment applications online ([8] Chen et al. , 2005; [23] Huang and Hsieh, 2011; [37] Lu and Wang, 2008).
Many recent games domain is the networked three-dimensional fantasy-themed first-person-view games with clear gaming narratives, where gamers are represented as versatile avatars who can walk, talk, take part in hunting, combat or various economic activities, and may also make friends, form communities, and fall in love which all offer a sense of belonging ([11] Chuang, 2006; [51] Whang and Chang, 2004). Certain specific aspects of online games appear to facilitate excessive play to a high extent, such as role-playing, immersion, competition, interaction, realistic scenarios, and various in-game tasks ([25] Hussain and Griffiths, 2009). Nowadays, online games are more intensive, more complex, more graphic, more violent, and more bloodthirsty than those earlier computerized games, and also with a larger and more thriving social network ([11] Chuang, 2006).
Online gaming can be extremely engaging and time-consuming and some gamers invest so much time and effort that they even neglect eating, sleep, hygiene, exercise, school, and work in order to stay longer in the pleasant, satisfying, and persistent virtual worlds ([21] Hsu and Yu, 2007; [25] Hussain and Griffiths, 2009). Given the amount of time young people spend playing online games, and their liking for the games, questions are raised whether online games have a deleterious impact on youth, and whether playing online games can lead to internet addiction. In massive news coverage, Chinese media metaphorically frame online games as internet opium or electronic heroin, especially for young people who are more vulnerable ([27] Jiang and Leung, 2012). Previous studies found that many players appeared to display the core components of addiction, such as salience, mood modification, tolerance, craving, conflict, withdrawal symptoms, and relapse ([19] Grüsser et al. , 2007; [25] Hussain and Griffiths, 2009). Thus, online gaming has become one of the most addictive activities on the internet, and some scholars even proposed it as one subtype of internet addiction ([50] Wan and Chiou, 2006; [55] Young, 1998b). According to [16] CYIA (2010), 47.9 percent of the adolescent internet addicts suffer online game addiction, who spend most of the time online playing games. Thus, this study aims to investigate the relationship between online gaming, internet connectedness, and internet addiction. The following hypotheses are proposed:
H2. Online game players tend to show (a) higher degree of ICI and (b) more IAD symptoms than non-players.
H3. Online game players who have more online game usage tend to show (a) higher degree of ICI and (b) more IAD symptoms.
Additionally, this study tries to test its moderating effect:
RQ1. How can online game playing moderate the relationship between ICI and IAD symptoms?
Previous studies also show that males are more delinquent in internet use than females ([24] Huang et al. , 2009; [38] Ma et al. , 2011). Online games are usually more popular among males, because of their graphic, emotional, and mainly violent nature ([6] Carnagey and Anderson, 2005; [19] Grüsser et al. , 2007). In China, internet cafés have become masculine gaming spaces full of males playing various online games ([20] Hsu and Chuang, 2008). Hence, the following hypothesis is proposed:
H4. Males tend to have (a) higher degree of ICI and (b) more online game usage than females.
Academic performance
Many studies have been conducted to examine how academic performance is related to young people's internet use. Previous studies find that the internet has produced mixed results ([26] Jackson et al. , 2007; [44] Roschelle et al. , 2000). On one hand, some studies suggest that the internet provides tremendous educational benefits, such as more information access, better visual intelligence skills, and enhancement of teacher-student communication ([42] Ni et al. , 2009; [47], [46] Subrahmanyam et al. , 2000, 2001).
On the other hand, many negative impacts are listed, such as most non-school hours are spent on the internet or playing online games, not keeping up with assignments, missing classes, falling asleep in school, declining grades, failing a course, missing a social engagement, and dropping out of other social groups (clubs or sports) ([24] Huang et al. , 2009; [29] Kim et al. , 2009; [43] Orzack, 2003). Research on the relationship between internet use and the ability to focus attention showed that amount of time spent using the internet by young people was significantly related to higher ratings of distractibility for academic tasks ([35] Levine et al. , 2007). Excessive internet use also caused deficient self-regulation ([32] LaRose et al. , 2003), and poor performance at school ([12] Clark et al., 2004). According to their findings, [10] Chou and Hsiao (2000) report that Taiwanese students might develop some academic problems, such as dropping out or losing learning interest in school, owing to excessive use of the internet.
Previous studies have investigated the relationship between online gaming engagement and academic achievement among adolescents and university students, and the results show that the addicted players had lower school grades than their non-addicted peers ([34] Leung and Lee, 2012). Therefore, the present study attempts to investigate the addictive potential of online gaming as well as the possible deleterious effect on young people's school performance. As a result, the following hypothesis and research questions are proposed:
H5. Those who show (a) more IAD symptoms, (b) higher degree of ICI, or (c) more online game usage, tend to have more academic performance decrement.
RQ2. How can online game playing moderate the relationship between ICI and academic performance decrement?
RQ3. How can IAD symptoms mediate the relationship between online gaming and academic performance decrement?
RQ4. How do internet connectedness, online gaming, and demographics predict IAD symptoms?
RQ5. How do internet connectedness, online gaming, IAD symptoms, and demographics predict academic performance decrement?
Methods
Participants
The data were collected in one of the earliest and largest internet addiction clinics in Mainland China, the Chinese Youth Psychological Development Base (hereafter referred to as "the Base"). Opened in 2005, the Base is in the southern suburb of Beijing, and is affiliated to the Addiction Medicine Center in the General Hospital of Beijing Military Region. All the clients are required to go through the diagnostic interview on admission to diagnose internet addiction.
According to the definition from World Health Organization, young people are those individuals aged ten to 24 years old, including two overlapping age groups, adolescents (ten to 19), and youth (15-24) ([52] WHO, 2012). Therefore, this study is focussed on the diagnosed internet addicts aged ten to 24. A paper-based survey was conducted among the young clients after the diagnostic interview, with the consent obtained from both the clients and their parents, because most of these young clients entered the Base with their parents. With the assistance of the Base administration office, 594 in-patients voluntarily participated in this study. All the 594 respondents were diagnosed with IAD in the diagnostic interview on admission. For the inter-rater reliability of the diagnosis, the consistency rate of any two psychiatrists reached 98.0 percent.
Measures
The data were divided into five parts: internet connectedness, online gaming, IAD symptoms, academic performance decrement, and demographics.
Internet connectedness
As aforementioned, the measurement of internet connectedness was composed of nine domains. First, internet use history was measured as the number of years the respondents had used the internet on a four-point scale, from "less than one year" to "more than five years." Second, task scope referred to the number of tasks to use internet. The respondents were asked whether they used internet for work-related, school-related, or personal-related tasks, with 1="yes" and 0="no." Responses were added up to show the breadth of tasks. Third, referring to site scope, the respondents were asked whether they went to internet café to use internet. Fourth, goal scope adopted the six media-system dependency goals raised by [1], [2] Ball-Rokeach (1985, 1998): to stay on top of events and groups that you care about; to express yourself or your opinions; to accomplish business, financial, or work tasks; to get advice on how to deal with other people, such as doctors and other health professionals; to play or amuse yourself; and for social reasons like making new friends. The respondents were asked how many of the six goals they pursue through online activities. The original responses (0-6) were re-coded as 1 referring to none of the goals being chosen and 2 for choosing one or more goals. Fifth, activity scope was measured by asking the respondents "What Internet activities do you participate in, other than e-mail?" Response categories included chat rooms, game playing, video/audio viewing/downloading, shopping, research/information, BBS, weblog, SNS, and surfing the web. The total number of responses (0-9) indicates breadth of participation, and then 0 was re-coded as 1, and others were re-coded as 2. Sixth, intensity scope was about the time spent on interactive online activities. The respondents were asked "Not counting personal e-mail, how many hours do you spend on participating in any online activities interacting with other people (such as chat rooms and game-playing)?" Those who did not participate in the interactive online activities were coded as 1, and the others were coded as 2. Seventh, evaluation of how the internet affects personal life was assessed by the question, "Thinking about all the pros and cons of the Internet, would you say it has an overall positive or negative effect on your life?" on a five-point Likert scale, and recoded as 1 (very negative and somewhat negative), 2 (neutral), to 3 (somewhat positive and very positive). Eighth, internet adhesiveness was measured by asking "How many hours did you spent online continuously as for the longest time?" Responses were re-coded as 1 (less than six hours), 2 (six to 18 hours), 3 (19-24 hours), and 4 (more than 24 hours). Finally, computer interest was measured by asking the respondents whether they were interested in computer or not. Each domain was multiplied by a value to create a common factor of 12, for instance, internet use history, a four-point scale, was multiplied by three, while binary scales, such as site scope, goal scope, activity scope, and intensity scope were multiplied by six, respectively. ICI was calculated by taking an overall average, ranging from 1 to 12. The reliability α was 0.76 for this subscale.
Online gaming
This subscale was composed of three items, including frequent online game playing, online gaming history, and number of friends online. Specifically, the respondents were asked to give dichotomized responses (yes or no) on whether they are frequent online game players; they were asked to indicate on a four-point scale (from "before six years old" to "after 18 years old") on when they began playing online games; and the respondents also responded on a five-point Likert scale (from "none" to "quite a lot") on the number of friends online. To create an online gaming index, each item was multiplied by a value to create a common factor of 20. Online gaming index was calculated by taking an overall average, ranging from 1 to 20. The reliability α was 0.70 for this three-item subscale.
IAD symptoms
According to [54], [55] Young's (1998a, b) classic eight-item symptom checklist for internet addiction, the respondents responded yes or no on whether they agreed on the following statements: "Do you feel preoccupied with the Internet (think about previous on-line activity or anticipate next on-line session)?"; "Do you feel the need to use the Internet with increasing amounts of time in order to achieve satisfaction?"; "Have you repeatedly made unsuccessful efforts to control, cut back, or stop Internet use?"; "Do you feel restless, moody, depressed, or irritable when attempting to cut down or stop Internet use?"; "Do you stay on-line longer than originally intended?"; "Have you jeopardized or risked the loss of significant relationship, job, educational or career opportunity because of the Internet?"; "Have you lied to family members, therapist, or others to conceal the extent of involvement with the Internet?"; and "Do you use the Internet as a way of escaping from problems or of relieving a dysphoric mood (e.g. feelings of helplessness, guilt, anxiety, depression)?" The reliability α was 0.86 for this scale.
Academic performance decrement
To assess respondents' academic impairment due to their internet use, a scale was adapted from previous studies ([22] Huang and Leung, 2009; [31] Kubey et al. , 2001). The subscale contained three items on a five-point Likert scale, ranging from 1, never, to 5, always: How often has your schoolwork been hurt because of the time you spend online? (How often did you sleep late because of using internet? How often did you feel too tired to go to school the next day because you spent too much time online the previous night? The reliability α was 0.73 for this subscale.
Demographics
The demographic characteristics of the respondents, including gender, age, education levels, and occupation background were also collected.
Sample profile
Of the 594 participants, 91.4 percent were male. The mean age was 17.76. Among them, 27.1 percent were at school, 33.0 percent were school dropouts, 29.0 percent suspended their schooling, 1.6 percent at work, and 9.3 percent were unemployed. Participants were from almost all the 34 provincial regions, except Tibet and Macau.
Results
To answer the proposed research questions and to test the hypotheses, relevant analyses procedures were conducted correspondingly. The results are presented as follows.
Correlations between IAD symptoms, ICI, online gaming, and academic performance decrement
To test the first, third, and fifth hypotheses, correlations were performed to examine possible relationships among IAD symptoms, ICI, online gaming, and academic performance decrement. Results in Table I [Figure omitted. See Article Image.] showed that IAD symptoms was significantly and positively correlated with ICI, online gaming, and academic performance decrement, r (583)=0.23, p<0.01, r (570)=0.35, p <0.001, and r (569)=0.42, p <0.001, respectively. ICI was found to be significantly and positively correlated with online gaming, r (575)=0.20, p <0.01. Online gaming was found to be significantly and positively correlated with academic decrement, r(578)=0.21, p <0.01. However, no correlations were found between ICI and academic performance decrement, and r (584)=0.16, ns.
Therefore, all hypotheses except H5 (b) were supported. Accordingly, the respondents with higher degree of internet connectedness tended to show more IAD symptoms. As one of the most popular internet activities, more online gaming led to higher degree of internet connectedness and even internet addiction, as well as more academic performance decrement. More IAD symptoms also led to more academic performance decrement. However, those respondents with higher degree of internet connectedness might not necessarily have more academic performance decrement. Thus, the interrelationship might be more complicated than a simple correlation. Summary of the correlation results among IAD symptoms, ICI, online gaming, and academic performance decrement is presented in Table I [Figure omitted. See Article Image.].
Differences in IAD symptoms and ICI between online game players and non-players
t -tests were performed to examine possible difference between online game players and non-players. Significant differences were found in IAD symptoms and ICI. The means for online game players and non-players in IAD symptoms were M= 6.14 (SD=1.07) and M=4.56 (SD=1.46), respectively, t (585)=10.48, p <0.001. The means for online game players and non-players in ICI were M= 11.40 (SD=3.51) and M= 10.62 (SD=3.60), respectively, t (576)=2.01, p <0.05. Thus, the second hypothesis was supported. More online gaming led to more IAD symptoms and higher degree of internet connectedness. The descriptive data for online game players and non-players are presented in Table II [Figure omitted. See Article Image.].
Gender differences in ICI and online gaming
To test the fourth hypothesis, t -tests were performed to examine possible gender difference in internet use variables (see Table III [Figure omitted. See Article Image.]). Significant gender differences were found in both ICI and online gaming. The means for males and females in ICI were M= 8.25 (SD=3.27) and M= 6.99 (SD=3.45), respectively, t (591)=2.24, p <0.05. The means for males and females in online gaming were M= 13.65 (SD=9.56) and M= 6.21 (SD=9.38), respectively, t (576)=4.81, p <0.001. Therefore, consistent with the reviewed literature, males showed higher degree of internet connectedness and online game usage than females.
The results for the female and male respondents are presented in Table III [Figure omitted. See Article Image.].
Moderator function of online gaming between ICI and IAD symptoms
To test the moderator function (see Figure 1 [Figure omitted. See Article Image.]) of online game playing between ICI and IAD symptoms proposed in the first research question, analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted based on the procedures outlined in previous literature ([3] Baron and Kenny, 1986).
ICI ranging from 1 to 12 was dummy-coded into high and low groups with the median 7 as the cutoff point, and 2×2 factorial design was adopted. The results in Table IV [Figure omitted. See Article Image.] show the main effects from ICI, F (1, 593)=4.01, p <0.05, and from online game playing, F (1, 593)=15.43, p <0.001, as well as the interaction effect of the two variables. A pattern emerged such that association between ICI and IAD symptoms was moderated by online game playing. The results show that the online game player group reported more IAD symptoms than the non-player group. Within the non-player group, higher degree of ICI led to more IAD symptoms. However, the influence of online gaming is so strong that ICI did not have much effect within the online game player group. Plots of these interactions are presented in Figure 2 [Figure omitted. See Article Image.].
Moderator function of online gaming between ICI and academic performance decrement
To test the possible moderator function (see Figure 3 [Figure omitted. See Article Image.]) of online game playing between ICI and academic performance decrement, another ANOVA was conducted. ICI was dummy-coded into high and low groups and 2×2 factorial design was adopted. The results in Table V [Figure omitted. See Article Image.] show no main effects from ICI, F (1, 0593)=0.711, ns, or from online game playing, F (1, 593)=0.220, ns, and no interaction effect of the two variables as well. Consistent with the findings regarding H5 (b), the interrelationship between ICI and academic performance decrement turned out to be more complicated than a simple correlation or a single moderator function.
Mediating effect of IAD symptoms between online gaming and academic performance decrement
To test the mediating effect (see Figure 4 [Figure omitted. See Article Image.]) of IAD symptoms between online gaming and academic performance decrement proposed in the second research question, a series of regression analyses were conducted based on the procedures outlined by [3] Baron and Kenny (1986). As shown in Table VI [Figure omitted. See Article Image.], in the first equation, online gaming as the independent variable significantly affected the presumed mediator (i.e. path "a" in Figure 4 [Figure omitted. See Article Image.]). Moreover, variations in IAD symptoms as the mediator significantly accounted for variations in academic performance decrement as the dependent variable (i.e. path "b" in Figure 4 [Figure omitted. See Article Image.]) in the second equation. Furthermore, the independent variable significantly affected the dependent variable in the third equation. However, the previously significant relation between online gaming (the independent variable) and academic performance decrement (the dependent variable) was no longer significant when the mediator (IAD symptoms) was entered, which indicated strong evidence for mediating effect ([3] Baron and Kenny, 1986). Sobel's test revealed that Z =5.62, p <0.001.
Therefore, all the conditions for meditational model were met. IAD was the mediator between online gaming and academic performance decrement, so online gaming might not necessarily lead to academic performance decrement, but those who played online games to certain degree of showing IAD symptoms would have a lot of academic performance decrement. Accordingly, the results are presented in Table VI [Figure omitted. See Article Image.].
Predicting IAD symptoms
To examine the relative influence of demographics, internet connectedness and online gaming on IAD symptoms as proposed in RQ3 , a hierarchical regression was run. The results in Table VII [Figure omitted. See Article Image.] indicate that the respondents who reported more IAD symptoms tended to be those who could not maintain normal social status at an average age of being a young person ( ß =-0.13, p <0.05). This means that those respondents who were school dropouts, suspended students, or unemployed had more IAD symptoms. As the first block of predictors, demographics explained 3 percent of the variance. When variables from internetconnectedness entered into the equation in the second block, site scope ( ß =0.14, p <0.01), goal scope (ß =0.16, p <0.001), and internet adhesiveness (ß =0.10, p <0.05) were found to be significant predictors. This indicates that the internet café users who use internet with more goals and higher degree of internet adhesiveness had more IAD symptoms. The IC block explained 11 percent of the variance. Finally, online gaming is the third block, and the results show that frequent online game playing ( ß =0.47, p <0.001) was the strongest predictor for IAD symptoms. As the last block of predictors, online gaming explained most of the variance at 12 percent. The hierarchical regression explained 26 percent of the variance in total.
Predicting academic performance decrement
To examine the relative influence of demographics, internet connectedness, online gaming, and IAD symptoms on academic performance decrement as proposed in RQ4 , a hierarchical regression analyses were run.
The results in Table VIII [Figure omitted. See Article Image.] indicate that the respondents who reported more academic performance decrement tended to be those without normal social status (ß =-0.22, p <0.001). As the first block of predictors, demographics explained 6 percent of the variance. Variables from internet connectedness entered into the equation in the second block, and intensity scope (ß =0.21, p <0.001) was found to be a significant predictor, explaining 5 percent of the variance. This indicates that the respondents with higher degree of intensity of internet use had more academic performance decrement. Online gaming is the third block, and the results show that frequent online game playing ( ß =0.10, p <0.05) and online gaming history (ß =0.12, p <0.01) were significant predictors, explaining 4 percent of the variance. IAD symptoms was the strongest predictor (ß =0.37, p <0.001) and entered into the equation in the fourth block, explaining 9 percent of the variance. The hierarchical regression explained 24 percent of the variance in total.
Discussion
In China, numerous negative media reports about internet addiction have caused great concern among the public. China was among the earliest to set up clinics, and even plans to lead the effort by registering internet addiction with the World Health Organization ([27] Jiang and Leung, 2012; [39] Macartney, 2008). However, the research on the internet-dependency group remains scarce. This paper scores as a pioneering study focussing on diagnosed internet addicts. Based on the data collected in one of the earliest and largest internet addiction clinics in Mainland China, this study examined the interrelationships between internet connectedness, online gaming, IAD symptoms, and academic performance decrement, as well as identified the predictors of IAD symptoms and academic performance decrement. Treatment and intervention for internet addiction among young people should take the findings into consideration.
Research in the field of internet addiction has attempted to delineate between healthy and problematic use of this medium ([17] Ebeling-Witte et al. , 2007). The term addiction has extended into the psychiatric lexicon that identifies problematic internet use associated with significant psychological and social impairment ([54], [55] Young, 1998a, b; [56] Young and Rodgers, 1998). In terms of social well-being, academic performance plays an important role in young people's life. According to the results, internet addiction significantly predicted academic performance decrement. This is particularly relevant given the excessive internet use among those internet addicts, which can be associated with educational disruption, with poorer academic assessment and more academic-related problems.
Consistent with previous research, the findings revealed that males might be more delinquent in internet use than females ([38] Ma et al. , 2011). Although gender was not the significant predictor for internet addiction, males were in the high-risk category with higher degree of internet connectedness and online gaming. Moreover, social status as the occupational variable was significantly associated with internet addiction and academic performance. Internet addiction caused various academic-related problems which may lead to school suspending or dropout. Moreover, these respondents who could not maintain their normal social status might try excessive internet use to pass time or for feeling modification. Hence, instead of letting those school dropouts idling away their time, prevention procedures, regulation, or treatment should target this high-risk group.
By including internet connectedness scopes, this study drew a more detailed picture of the internet use of the excessive users. Internet connectedness scopes turned out to be significant predictors for the development of internet addiction and academic performance decrement. Those who use internet with more goals and higher degree of internet adhesiveness had more IAD symptoms. In addition, internet café patronage was found as a significant predictor for internet addiction. However, the overall ICI index was not found to be significantly related to academic decrement. This result is consistent with many previous studies that the internet has produced mixed results regarding young people's academic performance by providing tremendous benefits as well as many negative effects ([24] Huang et al. , 2009; [26] Jackson et al. , 2007; [29] Kim et al. , 2009; [42] Ni et al. , 2009; [44] Roschelle et al. , 2000). It is reasonable because people may be engaged with various internet applications and online activities in different ways, and some can be good for their learning. Thus, the effect of ICI could be moderated or mediated by another variable. Online game playing was not found to be a significant moderator in this study, so future studies can be conducted to find out the moderating/mediating variable(s) based on other samples or regarding other internet activities. Moreover, it is important to remember that ICI as a multi-dimensional concept includes nine different scopes of people's internet use which can have complicated and even conflicting influences on young people's academic performance. The findings show that respondents with higher degree of intensity of internetuse had more academic performance decrement. Therefore, when looking into its effects on academic performance, it is better to examine its specific scopes rather than treat ICI as a whole.
Online gaming as one of the most popular internet activities was found to have great influence in the development of internetdependence, and showed negative impact on the respondents' academic performance. Online games create compelling, immersive, and socially rich virtual worlds, therefore the game-playing group showed higher degree of internet connectedness compared with the non-player group. This study also found the positive correlation between online gaming and academic impairment. After indulging in online gaming for long, young people may get immersed within virtual worlds and gradually neglect their studies. Therefore, the addictive potential of gaming should be taken into consideration regarding prevention and intervention for internet addiction. Nevertheless, this study does not suggest that online gaming should be forbidden in current internet era. As the findings revealed, it was online gaming to the degree of having IAD symptoms that may lead to negative outcomes, such as academic performance decrement. Special attention should be paid to this mediating effect.
China is now the country with the largest population of internet users in the world, which has reached up to 513 million by the end of 2011 ([15] CNNIC, 2012). Among them, 324 million are online game players, who spend quite a considerable amount of time playing online games ([15] CNNIC, 2012). Online gaming has been widely recognized as a popular leisure activity and become an ever-increasing part of daily life for young people in China. Thus, this study calls special attention to the effects on those who play them. The findings can offer insights for researchers, parents, educators, professionals, and policy makers, which can be valuable for prevention, treatment, and recovery of internet addiction.
Limitations and suggestions for future studies
Although this study was among the very few investigations based on the in-patient internet-dependent respondents and remarkable insights were provided in consistent with previous research, the findings should be interpreted in the light of the following limitation. There is no control group in this study, thus it is hard to make comparisons between internet addicts and normal people. Comparative studies can be conducted in the future to better illustrate the differences between the internet-dependent group and those individuals whose internet use does not turn out to be problematic. Future studies may also investigate whether other internet activities can play an important role in the development of internet addiction like the engagement with social networking sites. As for the generalizability of results, further research need to be conducted to compare other social contexts of internet addiction. Comparative studies can be conducted within Asian area, such as South Korea, Taiwan, and Hong Kong, where internet addiction has also been brought into public focus. Additionally, more comparisons can be made between eastern and western worlds, or between developing and developed countries.

