Recent Studies from General Hospital Add New Data to Cardiovascular Nursing (Effects of Internet Addiction on Heart Rate Variability in School-Aged Children) Cardiovascular Week. (Dec. 1, 2014): p190. Copyright: COPYRIGHT 2014 NewsRX LLC http://www.newsrx.com/newsletters/Cardiovascular-Week.html Listen Full Text: By a News Reporter-Staff News Editor at Cardiovascular Week -- Fresh data on Nursing are presented in a new report. According to news reporting originating in Kaohsiung, Taiwan, by NewsRx journalists, research stated, "The Internet has been gaining worldwide popularity in recent years, but a loss of control over Internet use might lead to negative impacts on our daily lives. This study explored the effects of Internet addiction on autonomic nervous system function through heart rate variability (HRV) analysis."  The news reporters obtained a quote from the research from General Hospital, "This was a cross-sectional design. Data were collected from 240 school-aged children who completed the Chinese Internet Addiction Scale and Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index questionnaires. Spectral analysis was used to measure HRV. Independent t test was used to compare differences in characteristics and HRV between groups. A 2-way analysis of variance was used to examine group differences in HRV. Internet addicts had significantly lower high frequency (HF) percentage, logarithmically transformed HF, and logarithmically transformed total power and significantly higher low frequency percentage than did nonaddicts. Internet addicts who had insomnia had higher low frequency percentage and lower HF percentage, logarithmically transformed HF, and logarithmically transformed total power compared with nonaddicts who did not have insomnia. Internet addiction is associated with higher sympathetic activity and lower parasympathetic activity."  According to the news reporters, the research concluded: "The autonomic dysregulation associated with Internet addiction might partly result from insomnia, but the mechanism still needs to be further studied."  For more information on this research see: Effects of Internet Addiction on Heart Rate Variability in School-Aged Children. Journal of Cardiovascular Nursing, 2014;29(6):493-498. Journal of Cardiovascular Nursing can be contacted at: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 530 Walnut St, Philadelphia, PA 19106-3621, USA. (Lippincott Williams and Wilkins - www.lww.com; Journal of Cardiovascular Nursing - journals.lww.com/jcnjournal/pages/default.aspx)  Our news correspondents report that additional information may be obtained by contacting P.C. Lin, Yuans Gen Hosp, Dept. of Obstet & Gynecol, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. Additional authors for this research include S.Y. Kuo, P.H. Lee, T.C. Sheen and S.R. Chen (see also Nursing).  Keywords for this news article include: Asia, Taiwan, Nursing, Kaohsiung  Our reports deliver fact-based news of research and discoveries from around the world. Copyright 2014, NewsRx LLC  Source Citation   (MLA 8th Edition) "Recent Studies from General Hospital Add New Data to Cardiovascular Nursing (Effects of Internet Addiction on Heart Rate Variability in School-Aged Children)." Cardiovascular Week, 1 Dec. 2014, p. 190. Academic OneFile, http://link.galegroup.com/apps/doc/A396957680/AONE?u=usocal_main&sid=AONE&xid=891eef37. Accessed 7 Mar. 2018
