India key player in Internet governance, enabling localisation of Internet essential: RS Prasad at ICANN57 [Internet]
Alawadhi, Neha . The Economic Times (Online) ; New Delhi [New Delhi]06 Nov 2016.
ProQuest document link
ABSTRACT
Speaking at the opening ceremony of the Internet Corporation for Assigned names and Numbers'(ICANN) 57th meeting here on Saturday, Prasad said "the language of the Internet cannot be English and English alone," and appealed to the ICANN community to make more local languages available to users.
FULL TEXT
HYDERABAD: Batting for a greater role for India in the global Internet governance space, Ravi Shankar Prasad, the Union Minister for Electronics and Information Technology, said that the next large wave of Internet users from the country would require a more inclusive and affordable Internet. Speaking at the opening ceremony of the Internet Corporation for Assigned names and Numbers'(ICANN) 57th meeting here on Saturday, Prasad said "the language of the Internet cannot be English and English alone," and appealed to the ICANN community to make more local languages available to users. ICANN is a non profit that manages the Domain Name System (DNS), which helps organise the Internet with the allotment of domain names such as .com, .org and .net. It holds three public meetings each year to discuss issues related to development and implementation of Internet policies, and has recently completed an exercise where the US government gave up oversight of Internet naming functions. ICANN's top priority now is work with the community, said its president Goran Marby. "Expanding our outreach is key to our mission. In this context, we are keen to further our ongoing engagement in India. As the second largest group of Internet users globally, we welcome India's voice and participation," he said. The non-profit is currently in the middle of an exercise to localise domain names, or the words next to the period in a website's address. A group of linguists and technologists are currently working on internationalised domain names (IDNs) that will enable web addresses in 22 local languages in India. This puts India in the leadership position for having the most number of local language domains. The ICANN57, as the ongoing meeting is called, is historic because it is the first after the US ceded oversight of the naming functions, and is going to be the first where decisions of how things will work in the multistakeholder model adopted by the community, which includes over 150 countries. With the multistakeholder model in place, issues of accountability and transparency have taken precedence. "The world is watching closely to see how a post-transition ICANN community handles its new found role. And much of that focus will be on those of you who are involved in enhancing ICANN's accountability and transparency," said Stephen Crocker, ICANN Board Chair. ICANN57 in Hyderabad is seeing 3,000 strong participation from different parts of the world, with over 1,300 participants from India. While appreciating and upholding India's commitment to the multistakeholder model of Internet governance, minister Prasad said: "Critical infrastructure that affects the national economy and security must be protected by
PDF GENERATED BY SEARCH.PROQUEST.COM Page 1 of 3
state agencies with full support from all stakeholders including ICANN. Critical Internet Resources (CIR) including root servers, mirror servers and data centres should be equitably distributed to reflect the global nature of the Internet and aspirations of Internet users."
DETAILS
Subject: Trademarks; Accountability; Internet; Transparency
Location: United States--US India
Publication title: The Economic Times (Online); New Delhi
Publication year: 2016
Publication date: Nov 06, 2016
Publisher: Bennett, Coleman &Company Limited
Place of publication: New Delhi
Country of publication: India, New Delhi
Publication subject: Business And Economics
Source type: Newspapers
Language of publication: English
Document type: NEWSPAPER
ProQuest document ID: 1836316972
Document URL: http://libproxy.usc.edu/login?url=https://search.proquest.com/docview/183631697
2?accountid=14749
Copyright: Copyright Bennett, Coleman &Company Limited Nov 06, 2016
Last updated: 2016-11-05
Database: ABI/INFORM Collection,Business Premium Collection,Global Newsstream,ProQuest
Central
LINKS Linking Service, Click here to order Full Text from OCLC ILLiad
Database copyright © 2018 ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved.
PDF GENERATED BY SEARCH.PROQUEST.COM Page 2 of 3
Terms and Conditions Contact ProQuest
PDF GENERATED BY SEARCH.PROQUEST.COM Page 3 of 3
