We Support NTIA's Transfer of Internet Power; By opening control of the internet beyond the U.S. government, Icann's plan aligns the interests of internet users.
Anonymous . Wall Street Journal (Online) ; New York, N.Y. [New York, N.Y]21 June 2016: n/a.
ProQuest document link
ABSTRACT
In "The Battle Over Obama's Internet Surrender " (Information Age, June 13), L. Gordon Crovitz argues that the proposal submitted by the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (Icann) hands authoritarian regimes power to censor the internet in the U.S. and around the world.
FULL TEXT
In "The Battle Over Obama's Internet Surrender " (Information Age, June 13), L. Gordon Crovitz argues that the proposal submitted by the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (Icann) hands authoritarian regimes power to censor the internet in the U.S. and around the world. The internet companies I represent disagree. By opening control of the internet beyond the U.S. government, Icann's plan aligns the interests of internet users, prevents capture by any one stakeholder group and lays the foundation for a stable and secure internet of the future.
The members of the Internet Association, nearly 40 of the most successful and best capitalized internet companies, support Icann's proposed transition and have repeatedly stated as much. Why would internet companies, with so much at stake in the future success of the internet, support any proposal that decreases the likelihood of that success? The only answer is that they wouldn't.
The internet has become a cornerstone of innovation not only in the U.S., but throughout the world. To better reflect this reality, it is essential that participation in Icann be comprised of a diverse, international multistakeholder group whose members share the common goal of ensuring a free and open internet that fosters and spreads innovation across the globe.
What's more, opposition to Icann's proposal is counterintuitive at best. Calls to stop the transition of Icann's functions to a global multistakeholder community amount to endorsing a system in which the federal government alone regulates and polices the internet without input from the private sector or individuals. The self-regulatory approach developed through the multistakeholder process benefits all.
Michael Beckerman
President and CEO
PDF GENERATED BY SEARCH.PROQUEST.COM Page 1 of 3
Internet Association
Washington
DETAILS
Subject: Trademarks; Internet access; Federal regulation
Location: United States--US
Publication title: Wall Street Journal (Online); New York, N.Y.
Pages: n/a
Publication year: 2016
Publication date: Jun 21, 2016
Section: Opinion
Publisher: Dow Jones &Company Inc
Place of publication: New York, N.Y.
Country of publication: United States, New York, N.Y.
Publication subject: Business And Economics
Source type: Newspapers
Language of publication: English
Document type: News
ProQuest document ID: 1798297262
Document URL: http://libproxy.usc.edu/login?url=https://search.proquest.com/docview/179829726
2?accountid=14749
Copyright: (c) 2016 Dow Jones &Company, Inc. Reproduced with permission of copyright owner.
Further reproduction or distribution is prohibited without permission.
Last updated: 2017-11-23
Database: ABI/INFORM Collection,Business Premium Collection,Global Newsstream,ProQuest
Central
PDF GENERATED BY SEARCH.PROQUEST.COM Page 2 of 3
LINKS Linking Service, Click here to order Full Text from OCLC ILLiad
Database copyright © 2018 ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved.
Terms and Conditions Contact ProQuest
PDF GENERATED BY SEARCH.PROQUEST.COM Page 3 of 3
