Internet is Changing Cultures

Computer and internet are invading the world changing all cultures and affecting people behavior. Although, internet has facilitates the way of living including business tasks, and data transactions, it has threaten all the cultures and traditions. The collaborative environment of Internet is characterized by its exceptional excellence of the intermediate. Internet is becoming an important tool to every individual globally and specifically in Europe. Nowadays, it is related to everything including education, business, and even the social lives. The facilitations of the internet has attracts all the people to be users until the internet addiction have explore and increase. The following paper demonstrates the role of internet in different aspects and examines its impact on people behavior. The first part talks about internet in business in order to show the improvement, development, and facilitation it has added to transactions between companies in a way that no one can imagine a business process without internet. Second part will include the internet in the education sectors, where online learning is now implemented in the majority of schools and universities. The third part talks about internet in social life in order to describe the changes it has occurred in cultures and traditions. As a conclusion, internet is very important in facilitating human lives in all their actions, however internet addiction that means people can live or do anything without internet influence negatively cultures destroying traditions and believes.
Keywords: Internet, psychology, education, education management
JEL classification: I21, I25
1. Internet in Business
People are always looking for developments and improvements that can make their way of living much easier, therefore inventions and discoveries focuses on technology and internet to enhance the speed and quality in transactions in the whole world. The internet is affecting people in everything changing the old methods and techniques in doing business, education and even entertainment. Communication between cultures starts through some trades transactions and developed to be over mobiles and emails, until it connect the world in a way that there is no distance and no boundaries between countries anymore (Robbins, 2000).
Business was before internet based on the manual methods in all the departments and in every transaction. People used to wait a long period to get their need or claim accomplished. Moreover, it was necessary and obligatory that the person come to the location of the organization to get what he wants whether it was shopping, buying, or claiming. The quick development of internet services has offered business the opportunity to expand overseas which increased the competition (Willinger, & Govindan, & et.all, 2002).
Companies tend to turn all the processes from manual to electronic that requires a change in strategies and tactics. The new methods and techniques adopted in the shed on internet are leading to a change in people behaviors such as employees' resistance (Pannu & Tornar, 2010). First electronic business includes all the business that uses electronics and internet as the main system for their operations. While, e-commerce describes the financial transactions through internet, and e-marketing means all the advertising strategies that takes place through internet.
2. Internet and Games addiction
E-games was found before 1990's, however they are well known and attract a high number of users from the world through face book. Face book is a social web application that permits to its users to contact with the surrounding, involving in different culture, and new friends. Moreover, it provides the users with business information, knowledge, and entertainment.
E- Games are games played over some form of computer network especially internet. In the past and before internet, games have always used whatever technology was current: modems, and hard wired terminals before modems. The success of online gaming has reflected the overall expansion of computer networks turning it from small local networks to the Internet and the growth of Internetaccess itself. Online games ranges from simple text based games (played by one player) to games incorporating complex graphics and virtual worlds (played by many players). Many online games have associated online communities which makes online games a form of social activity.
Teens can spend most of their time sitting by the computer or in the internet café for a long time without eating anything. In addition to the medical effects, egames can have negative influence on people's life since it leads to the lack of physical activities among children which makes them less active and communicative. Moreover, playing e-games especially that consist gambling such as poker may be very dangerous in a way that it can be a gateway to gambling problems.
3. Internet and Social Media
Internet communication is always updated with new ideas and features which turn the user to be addicted in order to keep following up to reach the highest levels and beat his friends. The use of e-games are isolating the user long time away from people which means that Internet communication takes time which may be for working or studying and makes the user sit on the computer for several hours which cause many medical problems such as vision problems, headache, and many others.
Many users don't use the internet in the right way since he/she publish anything which let them give up their privacy, and most of their contacts do not care about this much of information they are exposed to, the changes in the relationship status, the every single detail in their own life. The extra publish of the personal information sometimes threaten the privacy of people in a way that influence their lives negatively. There is a noticeable phenomenon that occurs on face book, any user on face book can sometimes add different names that have the same pictures accompanied with different information. This occurrence leads to different problems that are represented by the fake accounts. The fake accounts that are created on different user's information cause a social problem which lead to the lack of trust (Gould, 2009). Therefore people are requesting from social media to increase the privacy and control on their personal information. In another words, there is no problem if people read the published stories but they don't have the right to take it and use it as their authority which has negative impact especially on business.
The main problem facing the people these days is the absence of the privacy through the social media which is the main role in increasing the stress in the relationships and communication. People are now easily to follow and be watched by strangers without their acceptance because anyone can search any name on "Google" and then follow the name to the social media. Although, the user can ignore, the follower can "save" or "copy" all the information about the person. The social media is against the privacy that is a right for every person whatever his/her career is about. The published information can be an easy reach for anyone through internet in general and social media specifically. Media is a social communication network which allows people to communicate with others since they receive the information that the sender want to send through films, videos, advertising and other forms such as cartoon. Some of the production media produces sends violence scenes. They claim that it has positive impact on the children since they will understand that it always harm the one who perform violence. On the other hand, the nongovernmental organizations say that violence is not accepted on any type of media since the children will memories the action of the character that he like in order to imitate him in similar situation.
People used to live in a group which is called society. The old concept of society was known as face to face social relationships between people in a specific place taking into consideration the importance of each individual's privacy. However, there were people who like to invade other's security and know their daily information in order to use it in their communication, business, or to satisfy their curiosity. Along the improvement in technology and media, the privacy of people started to be public. The development in communication tools facilitate connecting people overseas, which indicates that the small social groups have expanded producing an attractive target for curios people.
After the development of internet, companies and individuals focus on creating social pages that can facilitate the communication between people. A lot of names can be mentioned in this case, such as Twitter, MySpace, Messenger, Face book and many other names that still used in specific country or limited places. One of the most popular social WebPages that have been successfully expanded and used by unlimited users over the whole world is face book; therefore the privacy and information security was an argument that creates several points of views. Some argue that internet and social media respect the privacy, while other build their arguments on the basis of the absence of privacy need. Many developments have taken place on the face book web page which introduces many application that satisfy the users claims, however each development have been accepted from a part of users and rejected from other users. The acceptance and reaction of internet users is related to the differences in cultures. Based on my beliefs in some traditions that care for privacy and information security; the privacy of information published on social media and internet in general must be completely optionally. Some people are interested in showing all their information sharing their privacy with all their friends, while others don't trust internet security; therefore they want to protect their privacy.
The founder of face book claims that if he gets the chance to recreate face book, he will make the information available for public since he think that the privacy is not important anymore (Boyd & Ellison, 2007) . Face book was created in a way that the respect individual's privacy, which mean that friends only can read what the user publish. The user have the right to accept or ignore the application that does not access his personal information, however, now the user can add the application if he permit it to access all his personal information. People have the desire to connect their favorite music, restaurants, and brands, therefore Face book launches customized pages about businesses or celebrities in order to advertise for their popularity (Greenstein, 2009).
Internet has the option that allow the user to join their favorite pages and the option share that let anyone to read the post. This fact lead Face book founders to say that it will work with different websites in order to permit the business to advertise for their pages. The only threats on social media for advertising are that the published idea can be stolen due to the absence of the security. The threats from attacks can expose the information of the user to be published on different pages which lead to the loss of the real founder of this specific topic. The threats and the weaknesses are related to privacy; since they occur against the whole system. Almost all pages that operate online have experienced a lot of security threats because the internet is public and can be accessed by hackers.
There is a part of users who think that social media creates a lot of pages in order to push the individual to put extra information about his/her interests, hobbies, and jobs. People from different ages are using social media and publishing their personal information, in addition to the routine activities that happen daily with them. Many users do not use the social media in the right way since he/she publish anything which let them give up their privacy, and most of their contacts do not care about this much of information they are exposed to, the changes in the relationship status, the every single detail in their own life. The extra publish of the personal information sometimes threaten the privacy of people in a way that influence their lives negatively (Hakansson, 1989). A noticeable phenomenon occurs on social media, any user on face book can sometimes add different names that have the same pictures accompanied with different information. This occurrence leads to different problems that are represented by the fake accounts. The fake accounts that are created on different user's information cause a social problem on face book which lead to the lack of trust (Gould, 2009). Therefore people are requesting from face book to increase the privacy and control on their personal information. In another words, there is no problem if people read the published stories but they do not have the right to take it and use it as their authority (Thompson, 2008).
Internet has great advantages in strengthen the communication and expanding the social bounds between people. However, privacy is an important human characteristic that must be respected and strengthens.
4. Effect on people
The internet has influenced the people in many ways and has served the society by increasing the skills and bringing wider views and knowledge, it also increased the imagination of human being through e-learning, e-commerce, and etrading. However, it wastes time through chatting and e-gaming.
There are many positive aspects for internet usage. Some of them are the following: Internet is a tool for entertaining people by online gaming. Making bigger social chain by making new friends on the net. The e-mail is essential for communication in business, family, and friends. It is beneficial since it is free. There is much information that can be found in internet including very wide subjects. Many services are found in the internet as online banking, job applications, and ticketing. Internet shopping is becoming more spread including buying and selling of products.
Internet has many negative aspects, some of them are it is a source of unlimited information, whether it is true, fake, good, bad, correct, and incorrect information. The imaginary use of the internet to do things that can be done by human resources. Causing economic troubles and problems for local business. The addiction of people to this tool is also one of the negative sides. If the internet is not used for knowledgeable cases it is considered a waste of time (Villines, 2012). About four-in-ten of all people in Britain (43%), Russia (43%), Spain (42%), Lithuania (39%) and Poland (39%) say they engage in social networking. In Germany (35%), France (35%), and China (32%), about a third of adults do so. Germany, France, and Japan are the only countries polled where more internetusers say they do not go on social networking sites than say they do (Pew global, 2011).
As a conclusion, Internet is very important in every aspect nowadays to a high extend which means that people can't do anything without internet. Add to that, internet has direct impact on the behavior of people of all age, gender and educational background.
References
References
1. Arpinte, D., Cace, S., Cojocaru, §. (2010): "Social economy in Romania. Preliminary approach", Revista de Cercetare fi Intervenue Socialä, Volume 31, pp. 64-79.
2. Barbulescu Razvan Changes In Males' And Females' Work Time During The Economic
3. Bärbulescu, R. (2010): "Risks and Consequences of Demographic Changes in Romania", The Romanian Economic Journal, Issue 36 (Year XIII), pp. 99-110.
4. Bärbulescu, R. (2013): "A Dark Scenario for Romania's Pension System Future: Fertility, Mortality and Migration Remain the Same", Romanian Economic and Business Review, Volume 8, Issue 1, pp. 66-72.
5. Boyd, D., & Ellison, N. (2007). "Social network sites: Definition, history, and scholarship". Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(1), article 11. Retrieved from: http://jcmc.indiana.edu.libproxy1.usc.edu/vol13/issue1/boyd.ellison.html CrisisRevista Economicä, 2011;
6. Cace, C., Cace, S., Nicolaescu, V. (2010): "Management of the Structural Funds within the Context of the Global Economic Crisis", Review of International Comparative Management, Volume 11, Issue 1, pp. 87-101.
7. Cace, C., Cace, S., Nicolaescu, V., Dumitrescu, L. (2011b): "The European Identity of Welfare and the Economic Crisis", Sociologie Româneascâ, Volumul IX, Nr. 2, pp. 113-126.
8. Cace, C., Nicolaescu, V., Cace, S. (2011a): "The Social Programs run by the Romanian Orthodox Chruch During the Period of Economic Crisis", Revista de Cercetare fi Intervenue Socialä, Volume 35, pp. 28-45.
9. Ciovicä, C.E., Florea, C., Enächescu, V.A. (2011): "Communication and Conflict - An Intercultural Approach", Euromentor Journal - Studies About Education, Volume 2, Issue 1, pp. 51-63.
10. Dima, I.C., Vlädufescu, §. (2012): "The Environment of Organisational Entities and its Influence on Decisional Communication", International Journal of Management Sciences and Business Research, Volume 1, Issue 9, pp. 1-11.
11. Dramnescu Marin, "Building pedagogical model based on social learning theory and other psychological theories of Albert Bandura in Scientific Bulletin", Education Sciences Series, 2004;
12. Drämnescu, M. (2014): "Populism and Democratic Values", South-East European Journal of Political Science, 2 (1-2, Jan.-June 2014), pp. 1-16.
13. Enächescu, V.A. (2011): "Managing Decentralization of the Romanian Educational System", Review of International Comparative Management, Volume 12, Issue 1, pp. 293-300.
14. Ignat, R., Stoian, M., Roçca, V. (2014): "Socio-economic Aspects of Rural Romania", Procedia Economics and Finance, Volume 15, 2014, Emerging Markets Queries in Finance and Business (EMQ 2013), pp. 1331-1338.
15. Nästase, M., Babru, M.M. (2011): "The Leadership Mix for Increasing the Organization's Competitveness", Review of International Comparative Management, Volume 12, Issue 2, pp. 230-239.
16. Nästase, M., Hotäran, I. (2011): "Fostering the Organizational Leaddership within the Knowledge Based Economy", Review of International Comparative Management, Volume 12, Issue 4, pp. 661-672.
17. Nästase, M., Predican, M., Roiban, R.N. (2013): "The Role of Employees in a Process of Change - A Case Study of the Romanian Organizations", Review of International Comparative Management, Volume 14, Issue 4, pp. 512-518.
18. Nästase, M., Jäpuricä, O.C., Tache, F. (2010): "Involving Project Leaders within Project Management Teams - Key Factor Towards Competitiveness", Review of International Comparative Management, Vol. 11, Issue 4, pp. 582-590.
19. Nicolaescu, V., Cace, C., Cace, S. (2012): "Importance of Financing the Social Economy Projects", Journal of Community Positive Practices, Volume XII, No. 3, pp. 520-536.
20. Nowicka-Scowron, M., Dima, I. C., Vlädu^escu, §. (2012): "The IC concept in the Strategies of Developing in the Urban and Regional Communication Networks", International Journal of Management Sciences and Business Research, 1(8), pp. 27-35.
21. Roçca, V. (2011): "Managing a Football League by Using a Transactional Network Structure", Review of International Comparative Management, Volume 12, Issue 4, pp. 770-779.
22. Roçca, V. (2014): "Media-encouraged gossiping - A deed of modern communication?", in Florentin Smarandache, §tefan Vlädu^escu, Alina Jenescu (coordinators): "Current Communication Difficulties", Editura Sitech, Craiova/Zip Publishing, Columbus, Ohio, pp. 271-276.
23. Smarandache, F., Vlädu^escu, §. (2013): "Communication vs. Information, an Axiomatic Neutrosophic Solution", Neutrosophic Sets and Systems, Volume 1/2013, pp. 38-45.
References
24. Stäiculescu, C., Läcätu§, M.L. (2013): "School and Non-Governmental Organizations Partnership in Benefit of the Local Community", Review of International Comparative Management, Volume 14, Issue 3, pp. 377-386.
25. Stavre, I. (2011): "Comunicare audiovizualä: aspecte ale europenizärii societafii româneçti", Editura Tritonic, Bucureçti, ISBN 606832012X, 9786068320120.
26. Stavre, I. (2013): "Mass Media in Search of a New Management and Business Model", Review of International Comparative Management, Volume 14, Issue 5, pp. 724-730.
27. Vlädu^escu, §. (2006): "Comunicarea jumalisticä negativä", Editura Academiei Române, Bucureçti.
28. Vlädu^escu, §. (2012): "Relationships and Communications Networks", Journal of Community Positive Practices, Issue 4/2012, pp. 790-796.
References
29. Vlädu^escu, §., Bunäia§u, C.M., Strungä, A.C. (2015): "Decision communication in education management", International Letters of Social and Humanistic Sciences, Volume 3/2015, pp. 53-60.
AuthorAffiliation
Vladimir-Aurelian ENACHESCU1
Donna TARABAY 2
1 Vladimir-Aurelian ENACHESCU, Teacher Training Department, The Bucharest University of Economic Studies, E-mail: vld_enachescu@yahoo.com
2 Donna TARABAY, E-mail: jessyjad@yahoo.com
Word count: 3240
Copyright Revista de Management Comparat International Jul 2016

