https://search-proquest-com.libproxy2.usc.edu/docview/1940533247/7147F4C55B3A460CPQ/9?accountid=14749

Treatments for Internet gaming disorder and Internet addiction: A systematic review 
Zajac, KristynAuthor Information; Ginley, Meredith K.Author Information; Chang, RocioAuthor Information; Petry, Nancy M.Author Information. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors Vol. 31, Iss. 8,  (Dec 2017): 979-994.

Abstract
Problems related to excessive use of the Internet and video games have recently captured the interests of both researchers and clinicians. The goals of this review are to summarize the literature on treatment effectiveness for these problems and to determine whether any treatments meet the minimum requirement of an evidence-based treatment as defined by Chambless et al. (1998). Studies of treatments for Internet gaming disorder (IGD) and Internet addiction were examined separately, as past studies have linked IGD to more severe outcomes. The systematic review identified 26 studies meeting predefined criteria; 13 focused on treatments for IGD and 13 on Internet addiction. The results highlighted a paucity of well-designed treatment outcome studies and limited evidence for the effectiveness of any treatment modality. Studies were limited by methodological flaws, including small sample sizes, lack of control groups, and little information on treatment adherence, among other problems. In addition, the field is beset by a lack of consistent definitions of and established instruments to measure IGD and Internet addiction. The results of this review highlight the need for additional work in the area of treatment development and evaluation for IGD and Internet addiction. Attention to methodological concerns identified within this review should improve subsequent research related to treating these conditions, and ultimately outcomes of patients suffering from them.
 
Researchers and the public have been increasingly interested in problems arising from excessive use of technology, including Internetuse more generally and video gaming particularly. Currently, debate exists over whether these problems should be categorized as mental disorders. In the case of excessive video game use, Internet gaming disorder (IGD) was included in the most recent version of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition (DSM–5; American Psychiatric Association [APA], 2013) as a condition warranting further study. The nine proposed symptoms for IGD are similar to criteria for substance use and gambling disorders and include preoccupation, withdrawal, tolerance, inability to reduce or stop despite a desire to do so, giving up other activities in favor of gaming, continuing to game despite significant problems, deception or covering up of amount of gaming, using gaming to escape adverse moods, and risking or losing relationships or opportunities (e.g., educational, career) due to gaming.
The APA’s DSM–5 Substance Use Disorders workgroup found less evidence to support the inclusion of Internet addiction more generally and cautions that, until more systematic data are collected, gaming and other excessive uses of the Internet should be considered separately (Petry et al., 2014). To best understand a specific condition, limiting heterogeneity is expedient, especially in the early stages. The Internet can be used for many purposes, but an increasing number of studies demonstrate that video gaming is a distinct form of excessive Internet use and associated with unique harms (e.g., Siomos, Dafouli, Braimiotis, Mouzas, & Angelopoulos, 2008; van Rooij, Schoenmakers, van de Eijnden, & van de Mheen, 2010). Although many studies confound multiple forms of Internetuse and problems (Ko, Yen, Yen, Lin, & Yang, 2007; Li, Zhang, Lu, Zhang, & Wang, 2014), some excessive uses of the Internet appear to represent different etiologies and expressions. For example, problematic gambling using the Internet is likely better represented as a gambling disorder than an Internet addiction, which may include uses ranging from excessive social networking to viewing pornography. Further, IGD and more globally defined Internet addiction are associated with different risk factors; most notably, male gender is a much stronger risk factor for IGD than it is for Internet addiction more generally (Király et al., 2014). Importantly, in studies that compare different types of online behaviors, gaming is consistently the activity most strongly associated with compulsive or problematic use (Kuss, Griffiths, Karila, & Billieux, 2014; van Rooij et al., 2010; Siomos et al., 2008; Whang, Lee, & Chang, 2003; Yen, Ko, Yen, Wu, & Yang, 2007). Thus, the literature suggests that IGD and Internet addiction may represent distinct problems and, in turn, may require different treatment approaches.
One major controversy surrounding IGD and Internet addiction is whether these problems are severe enough to warrant classification as mental disorders. However, there is increasing evidence that excessive gaming can be associated with substantial impairment. For example, a systematic review linked IGD to a wide array of negative outcomes, including poor school achievement, oppositional behavior, suicidality, and sleep abnormalities, among others (Kuss & Griffiths, 2012). On the extreme end, there have been descriptions of game-induced seizures (Chuang, 2006) and media reports of game-induced deaths (Spragg, 2015). IGD has also been linked to depression (e.g., Desai, Krishnan-Sarin, Cavallo, & Potenza, 2010), social difficulties (e.g., Lo, Wang, & Fang, 2005), attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD; e.g., Swing, Gentile, Anderson, & Walsh, 2010), and substance abuse (e.g., van Rooij et al., 2014).
Similar to IGD, Internet addiction has been associated with multiple comorbidities, including depression, anxiety, obsessive–compulsive symptoms, and aggression (see Carli et al., 2013 for a review) as well as negative outcomes, including problems at school or work, sleep deprivation, family conflict, and social withdrawal (see Kuss et al., 2014 for a review). However, many of the studies included in these reviews confound IGD with Internet addiction. Given the tendency for gaming problems to be related to the highest risk for adverse effects, it is quite possible that problems with gaming account for much of the relation between Internet addiction and problematic outcomes.
Unfortunately, the scientific literature on IGD and Internet addiction has been hindered by methodological problems. Because neither are established conditions, studies applied inconsistent definitions and measurement, which affected results from epidemiological as well as treatment studies. For example, several large population studies reported that the prevalence of IGD is less than 2% of the population (e.g., Rehbein, Kleimann, & Mössle, 2010; Rehbein, Kliem, Baier, Mößle, & Petry, 2015; van Rooij, Schoenmakers, Vermulst, van den Eijnden, & van de Mheen, 2011), whereas others have been as high as 8%–10% (e.g., Choo et al., 2010; Gentile, 2009). The studies that used definitions and assessments of IGD that most closely align with the DSM–5 proposed symptoms tended to find prevalence rates at the lower end of this spectrum and also point to similar risk and protective factors.
Estimated rates of Internet addiction range from 0.8% to 11.8% in Western samples (e.g., Durkee et al., 2012; Johansson & Gotestam, 2004; Morahan-Martin & Schumacher, 2000; Poli & Agrimi, 2012) and well over 10% in some Asian samples (e.g., Li et al., 2014; Mak et al., 2014; Shek & Yu, 2012). Some reports even indicate rates of “smartphone addiction” or social media addiction to exceed 30% (e.g., Andreassen, 2015; Gutiérrez, de Fonseca, & Rubio, 2016).
Regardless of the existence of a recognized mental disorder or its specific manifestations, individuals are seeking professional help for these problems, and in some countries, entire psychiatric centers are dedicated to treating gaming and Internet addictions. In addition, researchers have evaluated various treatments for IGD and Internet addiction. Reviews and theoretical articles have been published (Griffiths & Meredith, 2009; Huang, Li, & Tao, 2010; Jorgenson, Hsiao, & Yen, 2016; King & Delfabbro, 2014; King, Delfabbro, & Griffiths, 2012; King et al., 2011; Kuss & Lopez-Fernandez, 2016; Przepiorka, Blachnio, Miziak, & Czuczwar, 2014) as well as one meta-analysis of treatments for Internet addiction (Winkler, Dörsing, Rief, Shen, & Glombiewski, 2013). Winkler, Dörsing, Rief, Shen, and Glombiewski (2013) concluded that “effect sizes were high, robust, and maintained over follow-up” for both psychological and pharmacological treatments for Internet addiction (both gaming and nongaming Internet activities), although they caution that these results should be considered preliminary. This study made an important contribution to the field by presenting pooled effect sizes across studies, but the inclusion of studies without control groups (i.e., pretest–posttest studies) in the calculation of effect sizes likely led to an overestimate of the effectiveness of these treatments. Further, past reviews have not distinguished between treatment studies for IGD and the more broad classification of Internet addiction, despite a now growing literature indicating important differences in these problems. Many of the reviews are also limited by the relatively small number of studies, especially randomized controlled trials, available at the time of their publication. The Kuss and Lopez-Fernandez (2016) and Jorgenson, Hsiao, and Yen (2016) reviews are recent; however, unlike the current review, Kuss and Lopez-Fernandez (2016) do not differentiate between IGD and Internet addiction and Jorgenson et al. (2016)review a broader literature on etiology, prevalence rates, and risk factors for Internet addiction without providing a systematic review of treatment research.
The current systematic review is unique from earlier ones and has several aims. First, it provides an update on the state of the science, as many treatment studies have been published recently. Second, compared with past reviews, this analysis sets a more rigorous standard for inclusion of trials, with less emphasis on very small scale reports that are not powered to detect differences between interventions, and a greater emphasis on randomized trials. It still describes pretest-posttest evaluations of interventions without control groups, but with the consideration that changes over time and with any intervention are likely in the natural course of these conditions and their treatment. Third, IGD studies are considered separately from those of Internet addiction more generally because these conditions differ on important features, including their status in the DSM–5 and likely the ICD-11 (see Aarseth et al., 2016; World Health Organization, 2016), severity, prevalence, and risk factors, which in turn may influence treatment approaches and clinical responses to them. Finally, past reviews have not included an analysis of whether any of the treatments evaluated for IGD or Internetaddiction should be considered evidence-based treatments using established criteria. The current review evaluates whether any treatments meet the criteria for Well-Established or Probably Efficacious outlined in Chambless et al. (1998)’s guidelines for the establishment of evidence-based treatments.
 
Method
 
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
We first specified the scope and limits of the review. Inclusion criteria were that studies: (a) evaluate a treatment for IGD and/or Internet addiction; (b) use a design that is either multiarmed (randomized or nonrandomized) or pretest-posttest; (c) include at least 10 participants per group to exclude very small pilot feasibility studies or single case designs; and (d) include an outcome measure related to severity of problems or duration of gaming or Internet use behaviors. We did not specify a start date due to the relatively recent emergence of research on Internet and gaming-related problems. The end date of the review was set at September 28, 2016, when the database searches were conducted. Studies were excluded if they (a) focused on prevention rather than treatment of gaming or Internet addiction; (b) were review or theoretical papers; (c) focused on treatments for online gambling or use of online pornography exclusively or as the primary presenting problem; or (d) were not available in English.
 
Search Strategy
We searched PudMed and PsychInfo using the following combination of search terms: [“Internet” OR “gaming” OR “video game” OR “online” OR “Facebook” OR “social media” OR “smartphone”] AND [“addiction” OR “pathological” OR “excessive” OR “problem” OR “disorder”] AND [“treatment” OR “intervention”]. Secondary reference searching was conducted on all included studies. Finally, the reference lists of several reviews of similar topics were hand searched for relevant studies (Jorgenson et al., 2016; King & Delfabbro, 2014; King et al., 2011; Kuss & Lopez-Fernandez, 2016; Przepiorka et al., 2014; Winkler et al., 2013).
 
Screening Abstracts
Titles, abstracts, citation information, and descriptor terms of citations identified through the search strategy were screened in a two-step process. First, a study team member screened records individually to remove clearly nonrelevant records. Full text articles were obtained for all records that remained after the initial review. Second, two authors screened records independently and compared results. All discrepancies were resolved through consensus and, when needed, a third reviewer.
 
Data Extraction and Management
For each included study, data were extracted by a trained coder and cross-checked by a second coder, with consensus or a third coder addressing differences. The following information was collected from each study: type of treatment, sample size, mean age of the sample and standard deviation (or range when mean was not available), study design, nature of the comparison groups (when applicable), method of diagnosing IGD or Internet addiction related to inclusion criteria, primary outcome variables related to IGD or Internet addiction, and study results. Study results were recorded for the primary outcome variables related to IGD or Internetaddiction (e.g., severity of addiction, time spent online or gaming). When a study included follow-up assessments past the immediate posttreatment assessment, results from both the posttreatment assessment and the longest follow-up were recorded. Meta-analysis was not conducted due to the notable heterogeneity in study design, treatment modality, method of diagnosing IGD and Internetaddiction, and method of assessing primary outcome measures.
 
Criteria for Evidence-Based Treatments
The criteria specified by Chambless et al. (1998) for the identification of evidence-based treatments were used to evaluate the overall status of the scientific literature on treatments for IGD and Internet addiction. These criteria are used to categorize treatments as Well-Established, Probably Efficacious, or Experimental, and are detailed in Table 1.
 Enlarge this image.
Criteria for Identification of Evidence-Based Treatments Described in Chambless et al. (1998) 
 
Results
The initial database search yielded 11,031 records; two additional records were identified through other means (see Figure 1). Once duplicates were removed, 9,265 records underwent initial screening, and 45 were retained for screening in duplicate and underwent full-text review. Of those, six were not available in English, five were not multiarmed or pretest-posttest designs, two did not evaluate a treatment specifically for either IGD or Internet addiction, four did not include outcome measures related to IGD or Internet addiction severity, and two presented results from a sample already presented in another article in this review. The remaining 26 studies were deemed eligible for inclusion: 13 focused on IGD and 13 on Internet addiction more generally.
 Enlarge this image.
Disposition of study records. 
 
Internet Gaming Disorder Studies
Table 2 describes the included IGD studies. Five of the 13 studies evaluated medication, four evaluated cognitive–behavioral therapy (CBT) approaches, and four evaluated other types of interventions (i.e., a speaking and writing course, family therapy, eclectic psychotherapy, self-discovery camp). Among the nonmedication interventions, there was substantial variability in the number of sessions, ranging from as few as five to as many as 21. Two of the four CBT studies focused on young adults, while the other two recruited adolescent samples. Studies evaluating other types of psychosocial interventions all recruited adolescent samples. Most of the medication trials focused on young adults and older adolescents, except for Han et al. (2009) who recruited children with a mean age of 9.3 years.
 Enlarge this image.
Studies Included in the Review of Treatments for Internet Gaming Disorder 
Enlarge this image.
Studies Included in the Review of Treatments for Internet Gaming Disorder 
There was also substantial variability in the methodological rigor of the studies. Three of the five medication studies were randomized controlled trials (RCTs), three of the four CBT studies were RCTs, and only one of the four studies evaluating other types of approaches was an RCT. Other studies were quasi-experimental or pretest-posttest designs.
The approach to assessing inclusion criteria related to IGD varied across studies. Eight studies used scores from at least one instrument for assessing symptoms, with the majority of these (five) using the Young Internet Addiction Scale (YIAS) to evaluate IGD. Some of these studies used a combination of scores on assessment instruments and other criteria (e.g., weekly gaming hours). Two studies did not provide enough information to determine how the gaming-related inclusion criteria were assessed. Of the remaining three studies, one provided general information about the inclusion criteria but did not clearly specify how it was assessed (Sakuma et al., 2017) and one used number of gaming hours per day as the only gaming-related inclusion criteria (Kim, Kim, Shim, Im, & Shon, 2013). The third recruited a sample of children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and the only inclusion criterion related to IGD was that they played Internet video games (Han et al., 2009).
 
Pharmacotherapy
The medication trials for IGD examined psychotropic drugs typically used for treating depression or ADHD. Two studies with pretest–posttest designs found significant decreases in gaming time and IGD symptoms using a 6-week trial of bupropion in 11 young adults (Han, Hwang, & Renshaw, 2010) and an 8-week trial of methylphenidate in 62 children (Han et al., 2009). The latter recruited a sample with video game playing and ADHD and found that improvements in IGD symptoms were positively correlated with improvements in ADHD symptoms.
The three RCTs of pharmacotherapies included 25 to 44 participants per study arm. Two studies found that bupropion, a drug commonly used for treating depression, was superior to both a no medication control group (Song et al., 2016) and a placebo condition (Han & Renshaw, 2012) in reducing IGD symptoms in young adult samples. One of these studies found that these effects were maintained at 4 weeks posttreatment (Han & Renshaw, 2012), and the other reported that escitalopram, another commonly prescribed antidepressant, was superior to no medication, but inferior to bupropion in reducing IGD (Song et al., 2016). The Han and Renshaw (2012) study recruited a sample that was comorbid for IGD and major depressive disorder (MDD). They found bupropion to be superior to placebo in decreasing depression symptoms from pre- to posttreatment, but these effects did not persist at 4-week follow-up.
The third RCT compared two medications typically prescribed for ADHD and found that adolescents receiving either atomoxetine or methylphenidate showed reductions in IGD symptoms over a 12-week trial (Park, Lee, Sohn, & Han, 2016). All adolescents in this study had a diagnosis of ADHD, and there was an advantage for methylphenidate over atomoxetine in improving ADHD symptoms. The results of this study are difficult to interpret, as no placebo group was used.
Three of the five medication studies did not clearly specify how the IGD inclusion criteria were assessed. Two of these (Park, Lee, et al., 2016; Song et al., 2016) stated that DSM–5 criteria were used but did not provide information about how they were assessed. The third (Han et al., 2009) did not have inclusion criteria related to IGD symptoms, rendering cross-study comparisons speculative.
 
CBT-based psychotherapy
All four studies evaluating CBT-based psychotherapy employed two-group clinical trial designs (three randomized, one not randomized). The nonrandomized clinical trial compared a group-based CBT intervention focusing on craving to a no-treatment control group among 40 young adults (Zhang et al., 2016b). After 6 weeks, the group that received CBT reported significantly fewer weekly gaming hours and IGD symptoms compared to the no-intervention control group, but no test statistic was provided for the changes from pre- to posttreatment. Two other studies by this research group were identified during the literature search (Zhang, Ma et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2016a), but because their results were from the same sample, only the article that presented the largest proportion of the sample was included in this review.
One of the randomized trials compared a group CBT treatment with basic supportive counseling with an adolescent sample (Li & Wang, 2013). After 6 weeks of twice weekly sessions, both conditions showed significant reductions in IGD symptoms, but there was not a significant difference between groups.
A second randomized trial compared bupropion plus eight sessions of CBT to bupropion alone for adolescents with comorbid IGD and MDD (Kim, Han, Lee, & Renshaw, 2012). There were no statistically significant between-groups differences in reductions in depression symptoms. The CBT group showed significantly greater reductions on time spent gaming and IGD symptoms compared to medication-only at posttreatment and this effect was maintained at 4-weeks posttreatment. However, there was no control for therapist time (i.e., CBT sessions were between 90 and 120 min weekly whereas medication management consisted of 10-min weekly check-ins).
The most recent RCT compared eight sessions of traditional group CBT with eight sessions of virtual reality group therapy, a CBT-based approach that uses virtual reality technology to teach relaxation skills, simulate high-risk situations for gaming, and provide sound-assisted cognitive restructuring (Park, Kim, et al., 2016). Not only did the content and format of the treatments differ, but so did the duration of the weekly sessions, with the traditional groups lasting 2 hr and the virtual reality groups only 25 min. After 4 weeks, young adults in both groups showed reductions in IGD symptoms, but there were no significant differences between groups.
 
Other approaches
Of the four additional studies examining interventions for IGD, three employed pretest-posttest designs, and only one was an RCT. One of the pretest-posttest studies found that five sessions of family therapy over 3 weeks was related to significant decreases in gaming time and IGD symptoms in a sample of adolescents (Han, Kim, Lee, & Renshaw, 2012). This family intervention targeted family function and cohesion and encouraged families to engage in new shared activities unrelated to gaming. In another study, 13 sessions of eclectic psychotherapy that borrowed from CBT, family therapy, motivational interviewing, and solution-focused therapy was found to be related to significant decreases in parent-reported but not adolescent-reported IGD symptoms (Pallesen, Lorvik, Bu, & Molde, 2015). Detailed information about the treatment protocol used in this study was not provided. Finally, adolescents attending a 9-day self-discovery camp showed significant decreases in gaming time at 3-month follow-up (Sakuma et al., 2017). The camp experience included 14 sessions of CBT, eight sessions of “personal counseling,” three medical lectures, a workshop about gaming, engagement in positive nongaming activities, and a prohibition against gaming devices during the 9-day stay. None of these three studies had a control or comparison condition.
The RCT evaluated a writing and speaking course using content borrowed from massive multiplayer online role-playing games (MMORPGs) compared with a general education course in a sample of 59 adolescents (Kim et al., 2013). The inclusion criteria for gaming problems was based solely on number of hours/day playing a specific video game (i.e., ≥4 hr) rather than symptoms related to gaming. The authors hypothesized that harnessing adolescents’ interest in a specific MMORPG could engage them in tasks aimed at improving writing and speaking ability and could also decrease IGD symptoms. Adolescents in the treatment group participated in a series of tasks in which they wrote and then spoke about various aspects of the MMORPG. The control group followed the same procedures but the content was not related to gaming. Both groups showed decreases in average daily gaming after 8 weeks of intervention, and there was not a significant difference between groups.
 
Internet Addiction Studies
Table 3 describes the Internet addiction studies that met the inclusion but not exclusion criteria. Of these 13 studies, one evaluated a medication, six evaluated a CBT-based treatment, three evaluated family based approaches, and three evaluated other types of approaches (i.e., an online program focused on healthy Internet use; reality therapy; daily journaling). Among the nonmedication interventions, there was substantial variability in the number of sessions, ranging from one to 30. The Internet addiction studies tended to focus on older samples compared with the IGD studies. The medication trial recruited an adult sample with a mean age around 38 years. All but one of the CBT studies recruited adults, while the remaining study recruited adolescents with a mean age around 16 years. Studies of family based approaches primarily recruited adolescents. Studies of other types of interventions focused on either adolescents or young adults.
 Enlarge this image.
Studies Included in the Review of Treatments for Internet Addiction 
Enlarge this image.
Studies Included in the Review of Treatments for Internet Addiction 
Similar to the IGD studies, there was substantial variability in methodological rigor; the one medication trial included an RCT component, two of the six CBT studies were RCTs, one of the three family therapy studies was an RCT, and two of the three studies evaluating other approaches were RCTs. The other seven studies used pretest-posttest or nonrandomized trial designs.
Studies also varied in methods for assessing inclusion criteria related to Internet addiction. Seven used assessment instruments (with or without other criteria) and provided information on the cut-offs used. Three studies provided a general description of the inclusion criteria but did not provide details about how they were assessed (Dell’Osso et al., 2008; Zhong et al., 2011; Zhu et al., 2012). Two used assessment instruments but did not provide the cut-offs used (Liu et al., 2015; Young, 2007). One study did not provide any information about inclusion criteria related to Internet addiction (Kim, 2008).
 
Pharmacotherapy
Unlike the IGD field, in which medication trials were relatively common, our search uncovered only one medication trial for Internetaddiction. This study consisted of a 10-week open-label trial of escitalopram followed by a 9-week double-blind discontinuation phase comparing escitalopram to placebo (Dell’Osso et al., 2008). There were reductions in nonessential Internet use and compulsions for Internet use during the open trial phase, but escitalopram was not significantly better than placebo in the double-blind phase.
 
CBT-based psychotherapy
Four studies used pretest–posttest designs to evaluate CBT for Internet addiction, all in adult samples. There was substantial variability in the treatment approaches, which included combined CBT for Internet use and pharmacotherapy for anxiety (Santos et al., 2016); Short-Term Treatment for Internet and Computer Game Addiction, which incorporates 15 sessions of group and eight sessions of individual CBT (Wölfling, Beutel, Dreier, & Müller, 2014); and individual CBT (Young, 2007, 2013). All four studies found significant improvements in symptoms related to Internet addiction between pre- and posttreatment, and the one study that also evaluated amount of time spent on the Internet found improvements on that outcome (Wölfling et al., 2014). The two studies of individual CBT also included follow-ups 6-months posttreatment and found that gains made during treatment were maintained over time (Young, 2007, 2013). The Santos et al. (2016) study recruited a sample of adults with comorbid Internet addiction and anxiety and found a significant reduction in anxiety symptoms at follow-up. None of these studies employed a comparison condition.
Two of the studies evaluating CBT approaches were RCTs. Du, Jiang, and Vance (2010) evaluated a multimodal school-based group CBT intervention that included group parent training and teacher psychoeducation compared with a no treatment control condition. At posttreatment and 6 months after treatment completion, adolescents in both conditions showed reductions in Internet use, but there was not a significant difference between groups.
The second RCT was a three-group design comparing electroacupuncture, CBT, and a combination of electroacupuncture and CBT in a sample of 112 young adults (Zhu et al., 2012). All three groups showed significant reductions in Internet addiction symptoms over time. Participants in the combined treatment condition had superior outcomes compared with the single treatment groups, and the electroacupuncture alone group’s results were superior to the CBT alone group. However, the lack of a control group and different intensities of treatments across groups present challenges to understanding these between-groups differences. The combined group received 30 contacts with the treatment providers (20 sessions of electroacupuncture and 10 sessions of CBT) while the electroacupuncture alone group received 20 sessions and the CBT alone group received only 10 sessions, rendering modality comparisons confounded by intensity differences.
 
Family therapy
Three studies evaluated a family based intervention for Internet addiction. In a pretest–posttest study, a sample of 59 adolescents receiving a multilevel intervention that included individual motivational interviewing, behavioral contracting, development of a career plan, and family therapy showed significant reductions in addiction severity after 15–19 months of treatment (Shek, Tang, & Lo, 2009). The family therapy component focused on resolving conflicts, improving communication, reframing symptoms of addiction, and discussing stages of change.
A second study used a nonrandomized design to compare a six-session multifamily group therapy relative to a waitlist control condition (Liu et al., 2015). Families were assigned to the treatment group if their schedule allowed them to attend the therapy sessions or to waitlist if they were unable to attend. Family therapy focused on improving parent–child communication skills about Internet addiction as well as more general communication skills, the association between unmet needs of the adolescent and their use of the Internet, and establishing healthy expectations for the family system. Compared with waitlist, adolescents in the treatment condition had significantly greater reductions in time spent on the Internet and addiction severity. A difference in time spent on the Internet and addiction severity was again observed at a 3-month follow-up, but families were self-selected into the two conditions.
Finally, one RCT compared a 14 session group-based family intervention with treatment as usual (also group-based) in a sample of 57 families (Zhong et al., 2011). Seven sessions were for adolescents only, four for parents only, and three included both adolescents and parents. Adolescent sessions focused on pros/cons of Internet use and enhancing communication skills using dream interpretation, sandplay, psychodrama, and role play. Parent sessions focused on communication skills and how to deal with the adolescent’s Internet use. Parent–adolescent sessions focused on communication skills and improving family functioning. They found significant reductions in addiction severity in both groups posttreatment, but a statistical comparison between groups was not presented. Adolescents in the family intervention group had significantly fewer addiction symptoms at the 3-month follow-up compared with the control condition. The control group received treatment as usual that included military training and group therapy focused on addictions; however, the number of sessions of group therapy was not clearly stated. It is possible that the treatment effects were due to the frequency or intensity, rather than the content, of the family based treatment.
 
Other approaches
One of the three studies of other approaches used a pretest–posttest design, and two were RCTs. In a prepost study, Lee, Seo, and Choi (2016) found that a sample of 46 adolescents who completed a home-based daily journaling intervention showed significant decreases over time in Internet addiction symptoms. Adolescents tracked their smartphone use daily for 2 weeks (amount of time spent, content, location where used, and reflective self-evaluations). They were asked to discuss their problems related to smartphone use with their parents and were encouraged to modify their behaviors.
One RCT (Kim, 2008) evaluated group-based reality therapy compared with a no treatment control condition in a sample of 25 young adults. Reality therapy is rooted in choice theory and uses the WDEP model (W = wants, D = direction and doing, E = evaluation, P = planning and commitment; Wubbolding, 2000) to help patients to control their behavior and make new choices related to Internet use. The content of the group sessions was not described in detail. Compared with the control group, participants who received reality therapy showed significantly greater reductions in Internet addiction severity following 5 weeks of treatment.
Su, Fang, Miller, and Wang (2011) evaluated an interactive self-help web site based on principles of motivational interviewing. Undergraduate and graduate students (n = 65) were randomly assigned to one of four groups: (a) using the web site in a lab setting; (b) using the web site in their natural environment; (c) a noninteractive online program of the same content; or (d) a waitlist condition. The web site had four modules: an introduction; a self-assessment of Internet use that included a decisional balance exercise; setting goals related to change using a readiness to change ruler; and a CBT-based module focused on methods to change Internet behavior. All three of the treatment groups showed significantly greater reductions in the amount of time spent on the Internet and Internetaddiction severity compared with the waitlist condition, with no significant differences between any of the treatment groups.
 
Evaluation of Evidence-Based Treatments
Studies in the IGD and Internet addiction categories were evaluated separately to determine if any treatment modality met criteria for Well-Established or Probably Efficacious treatments using the criteria described by Chambless et al. (1998). In order to be considered Well-Established, two or more well-designed between-groups experiments must demonstrate that the treatment is either more effective than a pill, therapy placebo, or another treatment or as effective as an already established treatment. These treatment effects must be demonstrated by two different investigators or research teams. To be considered Probably Efficacious, at least two experiments must demonstrate that the treatment is more effective than a wait-list control group or at least one experiment must meet the criteria for the Well-Established group. Prepost and nonrandomized designs do not count toward these criteria. In the case of IGD, the studies that were RCTs (Han & Renshaw, 2012; Kim et al., 2013; Kim et al., 2012; Li et al., 2013; Park, Lee, et al., 2016; Park, Kim, et al., 2008; Song et al., 2016) had relatively small samples, making them underpowered to detect all but large effect sizes, which are uncommon in psychotherapy studies. Many did not find between-groups differences (Kim et al., 2013; Li et al., 2013; Park, Lee, et al., 2016; Park et al., 2008). The same was true for the Internet addiction studies, with RCTs being underpowered and most finding no between-groups differences Thus, for both the IGD and Internet addiction groups, none of the treatments met the minimum requirements for either Well-Established or Probably Efficacious, primarily due to lack of a rigorous design, small sample sizes, and lack of between group differences. Thus, all treatments are currently considered Experimental.
 
Discussion
The studies reviewed here cover a diverse array of treatment approaches for IGD and Internet addiction. All of them were published in the past 10 years, indicating a recent spike in interest, likely driven by clinical demand for effective treatments for these problems. Thus, despite controversies over the diagnostic legitimacy of IGD and Internet addiction, researchers and patients have shown interest in developing and accessing treatments for problems associated with these behaviors. However, even though progress has been made in recent years, it is still difficult to draw conclusions from this literature due to methodological limitations and a lack of a critical mass of studies on any specific treatment.
This review set stricter inclusion and exclusion criteria compared with past reviews on this topic and also conducted a more rigorous evaluation using the Chambless et al. (1998) criteria to determine whether any treatments can be considered evidence-based. As a result, past reviews resulted in a more positive evaluation of the extant treatments (e.g., Kuss & Lopez-Fernandez, 2016; Winkler et al., 2013), whereas the current review found that no treatments for IGD or Internet addiction yet meet the standard for a Well-Established or Probably Efficacious treatment described by Chambless et al. (1998) and, thus, all are currently considered Experimental.
However, similar to recent reviews (Kuss & Lopez-Fernandez, 2016; Winkler et al., 2013), the results of the current analysis also highlight the paucity of well-designed treatment research studies for IGD and Internet addiction. Despite these limitations, this review can inform areas for future work. In terms of medication treatments, clinical trials suggest that the antidepressant bupropion may hold some promise for the treatment of IGD, but larger RCTs involving double blinded placebo controls are needed before definitive conclusions can be drawn. Escitalopram, methylphenidate, and atomoxetine have also been applied to treat IGD, but they have not yet been compared with a placebo condition. In the case of medication treatments for Internet addiction, very little is known. There was a single study of escitalopram, but, given the study’s limitations and the lack of other medication trials, much more work will be needed to determine whether medication exerts effects beyond those that occur naturally over time or in response to help seeking in general.
The evidence for CBT-based interventions in treating both IGD and Internet addiction is also limited. In the case of IGD, there were four clinical trials but only two had active treatment controls and all had relatively small sample sizes. There were six studies evaluating CBT for Internet addiction, indicating substantial interest from researchers in using CBT to treat this condition. However, four of them did not have control groups. Little is known about the natural progression of these conditions, and some proportion is likely to get better without treatment. Therefore, it is difficult to draw conclusions about the efficacy of treatments for these problems without an appropriate control group. Of the other two studies on Internet addiction, one compared three active treatments (Zhu et al., 2012) while the other used a no treatment control and found no advantage of CBT (Du et al., 2010). Thus, although results from most published pretest-posttest studies showed improvements over time, there has yet to be a well-designed RCT of CBT that supports its effectiveness.
Only one study evaluated a family based treatment for IGD. This was an unexpected finding. Treatments for IGD have been most commonly evaluated with adolescent samples, and adolescent IGD shares many similar characteristics and risk factors with adolescent substance abuse problems (e.g., Park, Kim, & Cho, 2008; Yen, Yen, Chen, Chen, & Ko, 2007). Thus, it is surprising that more researchers have not modeled IGD treatments on evidence-based treatments for adolescent substance abuse, the most effective of which are family based (Tanner-Smith, Wilson, & Lipsey, 2013; Waldron & Turner, 2008). The three studies on family based treatments for Internet addiction were all conducted with adolescent samples. Two were randomized trials: one that compared family treatment with waitlist (Liu et al., 2015) and another to treatment as usual (Zhong et al., 2011). Both had relatively small samples but still found an advantage for the treatment with a family component. However, the Liu et al. (2015) study did not randomize participants to group; rather, participants were assigned to the waitlist if they were currently unavailable to participate in the treatment group. Thus, it is likely that the two groups differed in ways that influenced the results. Larger well-designed randomized trials with longer follow-ups are needed to confirm these effects, and it is imperative that these studies include controls for therapist time and expectancy effects.
Finally, there was an eclectic group of treatment studies for both IGD and Internet addiction that were not captured in the categories described above. All of these studies had methodological limitations, including lack of control groups and small sample sizes, and a few failed to find significant treatment effects.
 
Methodological Limitations
This review highlights the lack of methodological rigor in the treatment research for IGD and Internet addiction. As noted above, many studies utilized small sample sizes and/or did not compare the active treatment to a control group that allows for meaningful conclusions about treatment efficacy. Pretest–posttest studies have an important role in establishing feasibility, safety, and initial effectiveness of treatment approaches. At this point, this study design has been utilized to evaluate many of the treatment approaches summarized in this review, and the field is ready to move on to well-controlled studies to make stronger conclusions about treatment efficacy. Researchers and clinicians should be cognizant that most any intervention is likely to lead to some reductions in symptoms over time in persons seeking treatment (e.g., Dew & Bickman, 2005; Meyer et al., 2002), and treatment expectancy and intensity effects should be considered. In addition, it is crucial that studies be adequately powered to detect treatment effects, as it is otherwise impossible to determine whether null effects are due to the lack of treatment efficacy or inadequate sample sizes.
Another major barrier is the lack of standardized measures or even standardized definitions of IGD and Internet addiction across studies. In the case of IGD, this may improve given its inclusion as a condition for further research in the DSM–5 (APA, 2013) as well as recent publications guiding assessment of IGD (Petry et al., 2014, 2016). Standardization of Internet addiction definitions and measures have even further to go. In the studies reviewed here, there was substantial variability in what types of symptoms were included in the Internet addiction study inclusion criteria, and at least 10 different instruments were used to measure Internetaddiction across studies. This variability and the failure of Internet addiction to be considered for inclusion as a condition for additional research in the DSM–5, as well as likely the ICD-11 (Aarseth et al., 2016; World Health Organization, 2016), point to the need for a consensus on the defining symptoms of Internet addiction. Once symptoms are clearly defined, validated measures of these symptoms should be evaluated and used consistently across studies to allow for comparison of results. Finally, study results highlight the variability in information reported across studies, with some published papers omitting key information about inclusion criteria related to IGD and Internet addiction. Improving reporting standards across journals would allow for more meaningful comparisons across studies and improved understanding of study implications.
We currently know very little about the long-term effects of any treatment for IGD or Internet addiction. The majority of studies only measured effects directly following the end of treatment, with a few exceptions. The majority of these exceptions included follow-ups at 3 months posttreatment end or less (Han & Renshaw, 2012; Kim et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2015; Sakuma et al., 2017; Su et al., 2011; Zhong et al., 2011) and only three followed up at 6-months (Du et al., 2010; Young, 2007, 2013). The remainder of the studies only reported outcomes immediately posttreatment. Future studies should include long-term follow-ups whenever feasible to generate information on durability of treatment effects.
Many of the studies also contained substantial limitations related to statistical analyses. For example, intent-to-treat analyses were rarely conducted, with most studies dropping noncompleters from the analyses. In addition, several studies did not fully report statistical results (e.g., leaving out p values, means, or standard deviations) or did not conduct key statistical tests (e.g., group differences), making the results difficult to interpret.
Five of the studies (four on IGD, one on Internet addiction) focused on a comorbid sample (i.e., with ADHD, MDD, or anxiety disorders). This is an important area for exploration, as IGD and Internet addiction are likely to be comorbid with mental disorders. However, there are currently not enough published clinical trials focused on comorbid conditions to draw conclusions about treatment efficacy for this more complex presentation. Further, it may be premature to begin developing and evaluating treatments for comorbid conditions, as the prevalence of such conditions in IGD and Internet addiction samples has not been firmly established. Instead, it may be advantageous to include careful assessments of comorbid conditions in all clinical trials for IGD and Internet addiction as well as to conduct well-designed epidemiological studies to estimate the prevalence of such comorbidities. These studies can inform whether it is necessary to develop specific interventions for comorbid conditions in the future.
Finally, many studies did not adequately describe the treatment under evaluation, rendering it impossible to ascertain the content of the intervention. It was often unclear whether the treatments were manualized and how therapists were trained and supervised on treatment protocols. Further, studies did not report on therapist adherence to the treatment models, making it difficult to draw conclusions about whether the treatments were delivered with fidelity.
 
Limitations of the Review
The results of the review should be considered in light of certain limitations. First, for logistical reasons, we excluded articles that were not available in English. This exclusion may be problematic for this literature, as IGD and Internet addiction has received substantial attention from researchers in Asian and European countries, many of whom publish in non-English language journals. Nevertheless, we only excluded six articles for the language criteria. Based on the English translations of their abstracts, three of these were not RCTs and, while the other three were RCTs, all were authored by a research group that was included in this review (Zhu et al., 2012) and may have been from the same sample. Second, there is likely a “file drawer” effect, wherein manuscripts are not submitted or accepted for publication if there are null findings. Thus, there may be more studies that did not show any positive effects. Finally, although we made a distinction between studies of IGD and Internet addiction more broadly, treatment studies in the Internet addiction group lumped IGD and Internet addiction together. Among those that reported on subtypes of Internet use (i.e., only four of the 13 studies), the proportion of participants who reported gaming as the primary problem varied substantially from 10% (Young, 2007) to 78% (Wolfling et al., 2014). Although these four studies report descriptive information about Internet use, none of them examined treatment outcomes separately for these subgroups.
 
Conclusions and Future Directions
Treatment development and evaluation for IGD and Internet addiction is a new but developing area of research with ample room for growth. Several treatment modalities have been evaluated, including medications, CBT, family based treatments, and an eclectic array of other approaches. Unfortunately, methodological problems limit the conclusions that can be drawn about any of these approaches, and there are currently no treatments for IGD or Internet addiction that meet the criteria for an evidence-based treatment or even a possibly efficacious intervention. As noted above, future studies should aim to: (a) include a control group that will allow for conclusions about the efficacy of the treatment under study; (b) be adequately powered to detect treatment effects; (c) include long-term follow-ups to assess durability of effects; (d) use manualized treatment approaches and measure therapist adherence; and (e) employ intent-to-treat statistical analysis and ensure adequate reporting of statistical results. The CONSORT guidelines (Schulz, Altman, & Moher, 2010) indicate reporting standards for clinical trials and the guidelines from Chambless et al. (1998) can be used to establish evidence-based treatments. In addition, it will be important to conduct well-designed psychometric studies of measures of both IGD and Internet addiction that can serve as gold standards for the field and allow for consistent assessment of treatment outcomes across studies. In the case of Internet addiction, additional work is needed to establish a consistent and agreed upon definition of the condition and what it constitutes.
There is room for additional treatment development for these two problems. IGD and Internet addiction both disproportionately affect adolescent and young adult populations (e.g., Mentzoni et al., 2011; Haagsma, Pieterse, & Peters, 2012), and researchers can draw on the more established literature of efficacious treatments for other disorders among adolescents in developing treatments for technology-related addictions. This literature is fairly robust, with evidence that family based approaches seem to offer some treatment advantage for adolescent substance abuse (Tanner-Smith et al., 2013) and that “boot-camp” style correctional programs are largely ineffective (Pearson & Lipton, 1999). Cognitive–behavioral strategies, and perhaps even motivational interventions, may be useful for adolescent and adult populations alike, given their place in treatment of other mental health conditions (Dutra et al., 2008; Waldron & Turner, 2008). Finally, much more research is needed on epidemiology, etiology, risk factors, and outcomes of both IGD and Internet addiction. There has been very little research on the natural progression of these conditions, making it difficult to determine when and how much treatment is necessary to improve upon natural recovery rates. A better understanding of these issues is critical for establishing the efficacy of any intervention.
 


References 

1. Aarseth, E.,  Bean, A. M.,  Boonen, H.,  Colder Carras, M.,  Coulson, M.,  Das, D., &  Van Rooij, A. J.  (2016). Journal of Behavioral Addictions. 
2.  (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. Washington, DC: Author. 
3. Andreassen, C. S.  (2015). Current Addiction Reports. 
4. Carli, V.,  Durkee, T.,  Wasserman, D.,  Hadlaczky, G.,  Despalins, R.,  Kramarz, E., &  Kaess, M.  (2013). Psychopathology. 
5. Chambless, D. L.,  Baker, M. J.,  Baucom, D. H.,  Beutler, L. E.,  Calhoun, K. S.,  Crits-Christoph, P., &  Woody, S. R.  (1998). Clinical Psychologist. 
6. Choo, H.,  Gentile, D. A.,  Sim, T.,  Li, D.,  Khoo, A., &  Liau, A. K.  (2010). Annals of the Academy of Medicine, Singapore. 
7. Chuang, Y. C.  (2006). CyberPsychology & Behavior. 
8. Dell’Osso, B.,  Hadley, S.,  Allen, A.,  Baker, B.,  Chaplin, W. F., &  Hollander, E.  (2008). The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry. 
9. Desai, R. A.,  Krishnan-Sarin, S.,  Cavallo, D., &  Potenza, M. N.  (2010). Pediatrics. 
10. Dew, S. E., &  Bickman, L.  (2005). Mental Health Services Research. 
11. Du, Y. S.,  Jiang, W., &  Vance, A.  (2010). The Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry. 
12. Durkee, T.,  Kaess, M.,  Carli, V.,  Parzer, P.,  Wasserman, C.,  Floderus, B., &  Wasserman, D.  (2012). Addiction. 
13. Dutra, L.,  Stathopoulou, G.,  Basden, S. L.,  Leyro, T. M.,  Powers, M. B., &  Otto, M. W.  (2008). The American Journal of Psychiatry. 
14. Gentile, D.  (2009). Psychological Science. 
15. Griffiths, M.  (2005). Journal of Substance Use. 
16. Griffiths, M. D., &  Meredith, A.  (2009). Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy. 
17. Gutiérrez, J. D. S.,  de Fonseca, F. R., &  Rubio, G.  (2016). Frontiers in Psychiatry. 
18. Haagsma, M. C.,  Pieterse, M. E., &  Peters, O.  (2012). Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking. 
19. Han, D. H.,  Hwang, J. W., &  Renshaw, P. F.  (2010). Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology. 
20. Han, D. H.,  Kim, S. M.,  Lee, Y. S., &  Renshaw, P. F.  (2012). Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging. 
21. Han, D. H.,  Lee, Y. S.,  Na, C.,  Ahn, J. Y.,  Chung, U. S.,  Daniels, M. A., &  Renshaw, P. F.  (2009). Comprehensive Psychiatry. 
22. Han, D. H., &  Renshaw, P. F.  (2012). Journal of Psychopharmacology. 
23. Huang, X. Q.,  Li, M. C., &  Tao, R.  (2010). Current Psychiatry Reports. 
24. Johansson, A., &  Götestam, K. G.  (2004). Scandinavian Journal of Psychology. 
25. Jorgenson, A. G.,  Hsiao, R. C., &  Yen, C. F.  (2016). Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America. 
26. Kim, J.  (2008). International Journal of Reality Therapy. 
27. Kim, P. W.,  Kim, S. Y.,  Shim, M.,  Im, C., &  Shon, Y.  (2013). Computers & Education. 
28. Kim, S. M.,  Han, D. H.,  Lee, Y. S., &  Renshaw, P. F.  (2012). Computers in Human Behavior. 
29. King, D. L., &  Delfabbro, P. H.  (2014). Journal of Clinical Psychology. 
30. King, D. L.,  Delfabbro, P. H., &  Griffiths, M. D.  (2012). Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy. 
31. King, D. L.,  Delfabbro, P. H.,  Griffiths, M. D., &  Gradisar, M.  (2011). Clinical Psychology Review. 
32. Király, O.,  Griffiths, M. D.,  Urbán, R.,  Farkas, J.,  Kökönyei, G.,  Elekes, Z., &  Demetrovics, Z.  (2014). Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking. 
33. Ko, C. H.,  Yen, J. Y.,  Yen, C. F.,  Lin, H. C., &  Yang, M. J.  (2007). CyberPsychology & Behavior. 
34. Kuss, D. J., &  Griffiths, M. D.  (2012). International Journal of Mental Health and Addiction. 
35. Kuss, D. J.,  Griffiths, M. D.,  Karila, L., &  Billieux, J.  (2014). Current Pharmaceutical Design. 
36. Kuss, D. J., &  Lopez-Fernandez, O.  (2016). World Journal of Psychiatry. 
37. Lee, H.,  Seo, M. J., &  Choi, T. Y.  (2016). Journal of Korean Medical Science. 
38. Li, H. L., &  Wang, S.  (2013). Children and Youth Services Review. 
39. Li, Y.,  Zhang, X.,  Lu, F.,  Zhang, Q., &  Wang, Y.  (2014). Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking. 
40. Liu, Q. X.,  Fang, X. Y.,  Yan, N.,  Zhou, Z. K.,  Yuan, X. J.,  Lan, J., &  Liu, C. Y.  (2015). Addictive Behaviors. 
41. Lo, S. K.,  Wang, C. C., &  Fang, W.  (2005). CyberPsychology & Behavior. 
42. Mak, K. K.,  Lai, C. M.,  Watanabe, H.,  Kim, D. I.,  Bahar, N.,  Ramos, M., &  Cheng, C.  (2014). Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking. 
43. Mentzoni, R. A.,  Brunborg, G. S.,  Molde, H.,  Myrseth, H.,  Skouverøe, K. J.,  Hetland, J., &  Pallesen, S.  (2011). Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking. 
44. Meyer, B.,  Pilkonis, P. A.,  Krupnick, J. L.,  Egan, M. K.,  Simmens, S. J., &  Sotsky, S. M.  (2002). Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 
45. Morahan-Martin, J., &  Schumacher, P.  (2000). Computers in Human Behavior. 
46. Pallesen, S.,  Lorvik, I. M.,  Bu, E. H., &  Molde, H.  (2015). Psychological Reports. 
47. Park, J. H.,  Lee, Y. S.,  Sohn, J. H., &  Han, D. H.  (2016). Human Psychopharmacology. 
48. Park, S. K.,  Kim, J. Y., &  Cho, C. B.  (2008). Adolescence. 
49. Park, S. Y.,  Kim, S. M.,  Roh, S.,  Soh, M. A.,  Lee, S. H.,  Kim, H., &  Han, D. H.  (2016). Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine. 
50. Pearson, F. S., &  Lipton, D. S.  (1999). The Prison Journal. 
51. Petry, N. M.,  Rehbein, F.,  Gentile, D. A.,  Lemmens, J. S.,  Rumpf, H. J.,  Mößle, T., &  O’Brien, C. P.  (2014). Addiction. 
52. Petry, N. M.,  Rehbein, F.,  Gentile, D. A.,  Lemmens, J. S.,  Rumpf, H. J.,  Mößle, T., &  O’Brien, C. P.  (2016). Addiction. 
53. Poli, R., &  Agrimi, E.  (2012). Nordic Journal of Psychiatry. 
54. Przepiorka, A. M.,  Blachnio, A.,  Miziak, B., &  Czuczwar, S. J.  (2014). Pharmacological Reviews. 
55. Rehbein, F.,  Kleimann, M., &  Mössle, T.  (2010). Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking. 
56. Rehbein, F.,  Kliem, S.,  Baier, D.,  Mößle, T., &  Petry, N. M.  (2015). Addiction. 
57. Sakuma, H.,  Mihara, S.,  Nakayama, H.,  Miura, K.,  Kitayuguchi, T.,  Maezono, M., &  Higuchi, S.  (2017). Addictive Behaviors. 
58. Santos, V. A.,  Freire, R.,  Zugliani, M.,  Cirillo, P.,  Santos, H. H.,  Nardi, A. E., &  King, A. L.  (2016). JMIR Research Protocols. 
59. Schulz, K. F.,  Altman, D. G., &  Moher, D.  (2010). Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 
60. Shek, D. T. L.,  Tang, V. M. Y., &  Lo, C. Y.  (2009). Adolescence. 
61. Shek, D. T. L., &  Yu, L.  (2012). The Scientific World Journal. 
62. Siomos, K. E.,  Dafouli, E. D.,  Braimiotis, D. A.,  Mouzas, O. D., &  Angelopoulos, N. V.  (2008). Cyberpsychology & Behavior. 
63. Song, J.,  Park, J. H.,  Han, D. H.,  Roh, S.,  Son, J. H.,  Choi, T. Y., &  Lee, Y. S.  (2016). Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences. 
64. Spragg, A.  (2015). 11 People who died playing video games. 
65. Su, W.,  Fang, X.,  Miller, J. K., &  Wang, Y.  (2011). CyberPsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking. 
66. Swing, E. L.,  Gentile, D. A.,  Anderson, C. A., &  Walsh, D. A.  (2010). Pediatrics. 
67. Tanner-Smith, E. E.,  Wilson, S. J., &  Lipsey, M. W.  (2013). Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment. 
68. Tao, R.,  Huang, X.,  Wang, J.,  Zhang, H.,  Zhang, Y., &  Li, M.  (2010). Addiction. 
69. van Rooij, A. J.,  Kuss, D. J.,  Griffiths, M. D.,  Shorter, G. W.,  Schoenmakers, M. T., &  van de Mheen, D.  (2014). Journal of Behavioral Addictions. 
70. van Rooij, A. J.,  Schoenmakers, T. M.,  van de Eijnden, R. J., &  van de Mheen, D.  (2010). The Journal of Adolescent Health. 
71. Van Rooij, A. J.,  Schoenmakers, T. M.,  Vermulst, A. A.,  Van den Eijnden, R. J., &  Van de Mheen, D.  (2011). Addiction. 
72. Waldron, H. B., &  Turner, C. W.  (2008). Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology. 
73. Whang, L. S.,  Lee, S., &  Chang, G.  (2003). CyberPsychology & Behavior. 
74. Winkler, A.,  Dörsing, B.,  Rief, W.,  Shen, Y., &  Glombiewski, J. A.  (2013). Clinical Psychology Review. 
75. Wölfling, K.,  Beutel, M. E.,  Dreier, M., &  Müller, K. W.  (2014). BioMed Research International. 
76.  (2016). ICD-11 Beta Draft. 
77. Wubbolding, R.  (2000). Reality therapy for the 21st century. Philadelphia, PA: Brunner-Routledge. 
78. Yen, J. Y.,  Ko, C. H.,  Yen, C. F.,  Wu, H. Y., &  Yang, M. J.  (2007). The Journal of Adolescent Health. 
79. Yen, J. Y.,  Yen, C. F.,  Chen, C. C.,  Chen, S. H., &  Ko, C. H.  (2007). CyberPsychology & Behavior. 
80. Young, K. S.  (2007). CyberPsychology & Behavior. 
81. Young, K. S.  (2013). Journal of Behavioral Addictions. 
82. Zhang, J. T.,  Ma, S. S.,  Li, C. R.,  Liu, L.,  Xia, C. C.,  Lan, J., &  Fang, X. Y.  (2016). Addiction Biology. 
83. Zhang, J. T.,  Yao, Y. W.,  Potenza, M. N.,  Xia, C. C.,  Lan, J.,  Liu, L., &  Fang, X. Y.  (2016a). Scientific Reports. 
84. Zhang, J. T.,  Yao, Y. W.,  Potenza, M. N.,  Xia, C. C.,  Lan, J.,  Liu, L., &  Fang, X. Y.  (2016b). NeuroImage Clinical. 
85. Zhong, X.,  Zu, S.,  Sha, S.,  Tao, R.,  Zhao, C.,  Yang, F., &  Sha, P.  (2011). Social Behavior and Personality. 
86. Zhu, T. M.,  Li, H.,  Jin, R. J.,  Zheng, Z.,  Luo, Y.,  Ye, H., &  Zhu, H. M.  (2012). Chinese Journal of Integrative Medicine. 
Show less


Address for Correspondence: 
Kristyn Zajac, University of Connecticut School of Medicine, 263 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT, 06030
Email:  INVALID_URI_IN_SOURCE

